 TWELVE STEPS
       and
TWELVE TRADITIONS


        TWELVE
           STEPS
              and
        TWELVE
   TRADITIONS

               --x--




ALCOHOLICSANONYMOUS WORLDSERVICES,INC.
                   ®

     BOX459,GRANDCENTRALSTATION
           NEWYORK,NY10163

          Copyright ©1952,1953,1981byTheA.A.Grapevine,
            Inc.andAlcoholicsAnonymousPublishing(now
          knownasAlcoholicsAnonymousWorldServices,Inc.)

                          Allrightsreserved
                       FirstPrinting,April1953

                  Sixty-fourthPrinting, January2003

                   WindowsHelpversion, July1994   *


              Electronic.PDFversion, September 2005  +




                   This edition isNOTA.A. General
                ServiceConferenceapprovedliterature




            ALCOHOLICSANONYMOUSandA.A.areregistered
                 trademarks ofA.A.WorldServices,Inc.
                           ®




                         ISBN0-916856-01-1

              LibraryofCongressCatalogCardNo.53-5454
                 PrintedintheUnitedStatesofAmerica


 * Transcribed by "Mr. D.". Software development by cyb.
 + .PDF version based upon the text of the Windows Help version
and published by ARID Media. A.A. World Services and its
subsidiaries were not involved within the production of this
specific work.

                             Contents


Foreword                                                           15

                     THE TWELVE STEPS

Step One                                                           21
   "We admitted we were powerless over alcohol--that
   our lives had become unmanageable."
   Who cares to admit complete defeat? Admission of pow-
   erlessness is the first step in liberation. Relation of humili-
   ty to sobriety. Mental obsession plus physical allergy.
   Why must every A.A. hit bottom?


Step Two                                                           25
   "Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves
   could restore us to sanity."
   What can we believe in? A.A. does not demand belief;
   Twelve Steps are only suggestions. Importance of an open
   mind. Variety of ways to faith. Substitution of A.A. as
   Higher Power. Plight of the disillusioned. Roadblocks of
   indifference and prejudice. Lost faith found in A.A. Prob-
   lems of intellectuality and self-sufficiency. Negative and
   positive thinking. Self-righteousness. Defiance is an out-
   standing characteristic of alcoholics. Step Two is a rally-
   ing point to sanity. Right relation to God.


Step Three                                                         34
   "Made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to
   the care of God, as we understood Him."
   Step Three is like opening of a locked door. How shall we
   let God into our lives? Willingness is the key. Depen-
   dence as a means to independence. Dangers of self-suffi-
                                     5

6                         C O N T E N T S

   ciency. Turning our will over to Higher Power. Misuse of
   willpower. Sustained and personal exertion necessary to
   conform to God's will.


Step Four                                                       42
   "Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of
   ourselves."
   How instincts can exceed their proper function. Step Four
   is an effort to discover our liabilities. Basic problem of
   extremes in instinctive drives. Misguided moral inventory
   can result in guilt, grandiosity, or blaming others. Assets
   can be noted with liabilities. Self-justification is danger-
   ous. Willingness to take inventory brings light and new
   confidence. Step Four is beginning of lifetime practice.
   Common symptoms of emotional insecurity are worry,
   anger, self-pity, and depression. Inventory reviews rela-
   tionships. Importance of thoroughness.


Step Five                                                       55
   "Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to another human
   being the exact nature of our wrongs."
   Twelve Steps deflate ego. Step Five is difficult but neces-
   sary to sobriety and peace of mind. Confession is an an-
   cient discipline. Without fearless admission of defects,
   few could stay sober. What do we receive from Step
   Five? Beginning of true kinship with man and God. Lose
   sense of isolation, receive forgiveness and give it; learn
   humility; gain honesty and realism about ourselves. Ne-
   cessity for complete honesty. Danger of rationalization.
   How to choose the person in whom to confide. Results are
   tranquility and consciousness of God. Oneness with God
   and man prepares us for following Steps.


Step Six                                                        63
   "Were entirely ready to have God remove all these
   defects of character."
   Step Six necessary to spiritual growth. The beginning of a

                         C O N T E N T S                         7

   lifetime job. Recognition of difference between striving
   for objective--and perfection. Why we must keep trying.
   "Being ready" is all-important. Necessity of taking action.
   Delay is dangerous. Rebellion may be fatal. Point at
   which we abandon limited objectives and move toward
   God's will for us.


Step Seven                                                      70
   "Humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings."
   What is humility? What can it mean to us? The avenue to
   true freedom of the human spirit. Necessary aid to sur-
   vival. Value of ego-puncturing. Failure and misery trans-
   formed by humility. Strength from weakness. Pain is the
   admission price to new life. Self-centered fear chief acti-
   vator of defects. Step Seven is change in attitude which
   permits us to move out of ourselves toward God.


Step Eight                                                      77
   "Made a list of all persons we had harmed, and
   became willing to make amends to them all."
   This and the next two Steps are concerned with personal
   relations. Learning to live with others is a fascinating ad-
   venture. Obstacles: reluctance to forgive; nonadmission of
   wrongs to others; purposeful forgetting. Necessity of ex-
   haustive survey of past. Deepening insight results from
   thoroughness. Kinds of harm done to others. Avoiding ex-
   treme judgments. Taking the objective view. Step Eight is
   the beginning of the end of isolation.


Step Nine                                                       83
   "Made direct amends to such people wherever
   possible, except when to do so would injure them or
   others."
   A tranquil mood is the first requisite for good judgment.
   Good timing is important in making amends. What is
   courage? Prudence means taking calculated chances.
   Amends begin when we join A.A. Peace of mind cannot

8                          C O N T E N T S

   be bought at the expense of others. Need for discretion.
   Readiness to take consequences of our past and to take re-
   sponsibility for well-being of others is spirit of Step Nine.


Step Ten                                                          88
   "Continued to take personal inventory and when we
   were wrong promptly admitted it."
   Can we stay sober and keep emotional balance under all
   conditions? Self-searching becomes a regular habit. Ad-
   mit, accept, and patiently correct defects. Emotional hang-
   over. When past is settled with, present challenges can be
   met. Varieties of inventory. Anger, resentments, jealous-
   ly, envy, self-pity, hurt pride--all led to the bottle. Self-
   restraint first objective. Insurance against "big-shot-ism."
   Let's look at credits as well as debits. Examination of mo-
   tives.


Step Eleven                                                       96
   "Sought through prayer and meditation to improve our
   conscious contact with God as we understood Him,
   praying only for knowledge of His will for us and the
   power to carry that out."
   Meditation and prayer main channels to Higher Power.
   Connection between self-examination and meditation and
   prayer. An unshakable foundation for life. How shall we
   meditate? Meditation has no boundaries. An individual
   adventure. First result is emotional balance. What about
   prayer? Daily petitions for understanding of God's will
   and grace to carry it out. Actual results of prayer are be-
   yond question. Rewards of meditation and prayer.


Step Twelve                                                      106
   "Having had a spiritual awakening as the result of
   these steps, we tried to carry this message to
   alcoholics, and to practice these principles in all our
   affairs."
   Joy of living is the theme of the Twelfth Step. Action its

                           C O N T E N T S                         9

   keyword. Giving that asks no reward. Love that has no
   price tag. What is spiritual awakening? A new state of
   consciousness and being is received as a free gift. Readi-
   ness to receive free gift lies in practice of Twelve Steps.
   The magnificent reality. Rewards of helping other alco-
   holics. Kinds of Twelfth Step work. Problems of Twelfth
   Step work. What about the practice of these principles in
   all our affairs? Monotony, pain and calamity turned to
   good use by practice of Steps. Difficulties of practice.
   "Two-stepping." Switch to "twelve-stepping" and demon-
   strations of faith. Growing spiritually is the answer to our
   problems. Placing spiritual growth first. Domination and
   overdependence. Putting our lives on give-and-take basis.
   Dependence upon God necessary to recovery of alco-
   holics. "Practicing these principles in all our affairs": Do-
   mestic relations in A.A. Outlook upon material matters
   changes. So do feelings about personal importance. In-
   stincts restored to true purpose. Understanding is key to
   right attitudes, right action key to good living.




                THE TWELVE TRADITIONS

Tradition One                                                    129
   "Our common welfare should come first; personal
   recovery depends upon A.A. unity."
   Without unity, A.A. dies. Individual liberty, yet great uni-
   ty. Key to paradox: each A.A.'s life depends on obedience
   to spiritual principles. The group must survive or the indi-
   vidual will not. Common welfare comes first. How best to
   live and work together as groups.



Tradition Two                                                    132
   "For our group purpose there is but one ultimate

10                       C O N T E N T S

   authority--a loving God as He may express Himself in
   our group conscience. Our leaders are but trusted
   servants; they do not govern."
   Where does A.A. get its direction? Sole authority in A.A.
   is loving God as He may express Himself in the group
   conscience. Formation of a group. Growing pains. Rotat-
   ing committees are servants of the group. Leaders do not
   govern, they serve. Does A.A. have a real leadership?
   "Elder statesmen" and "bleeding deacons." The group
   conscience speaks.


Tradition Three                                                 139
   "The only requirement for A.A. membership is a desire
   to stop drinking."
   Early intolerance based on fear. To take away any alco-
   holic's chance an A.A. was sometimes to pronounce his
   death sentence. Membership regulations abandoned. Two
   examples of experience. Any alcoholic is a member of
   A.A. when he says so.


Tradition Four                                                  146
   "Each group should be autonomous except in matters
   affecting other groups or A.A. as a whole."
   Every group manages its affairs as it pleases, except when
   A.A. as a whole is threatened. Is such liberty dangerous?
   The group, like the individual, must eventually conform
   to principles that guarantee survival. Two storm signals--
   a group ought not do anything which would injure A.A. as
   a whole, nor affiliate itself with outside interests. An ex-
   ample: the "A.A. Center" that didn't work.


Tradition Five                                                  150
   "Each group has but one primary purpose--to carry
   the message to the alcoholic who still suffers."
   Better do one thing well than many badly. The life of our
   Fellowship depends on this principle. The ability of each
   A.A. to identify himself with and bring recovery to the

                          C O N T E N T S                        11

   newcomer is a gift from God . . . passing on this gift to
   others is our one aim. Sobriety can't be kept unless it is
   given away.


Tradition Six                                                   155
   "An A.A. group ought never endorse, finance or lend
   the A.A. name to any related facility or outside
   enterprise, lest problems of money, property and
   prestige divert us from our primary purpose."
   Experience proved that we could not endorse any related
   enterprise, no matter how good. We could not be all
   things to all men. We saw that we could not lend the A.A.
   name to any outside activity.


Tradition Seven                                                 160
   "Every A.A. group ought to be fully self-supporting,
   declining outside contributions."
   No A.A. Tradition had the labor pains this one did. Col-
   lective poverty initially a matter of necessity. Fear of ex-
   ploitation. Necessity of separating the spiritual from the
   material. Decision to subsist on A.A. voluntary contribu-
   tions only. Placing the responsibility of supporting A.A.
   headquarters directly upon A.A. members. Bare running
   expenses plus a prudent reserve is headquarters policy.


Tradition Eight                                                 166
   "Alcoholics    Anonymous       should    remain    forever
   nonprofessional, but our service centers may employ
   special workers."
   You can't mix the Twelfth Step and money. Line of cleav-
   age between voluntary Twelfth Step work and paid-for
   services. A.A. could not function without full-time service
   workers. Professional workers are not professional A.A.'s.
   Relation of A.A. to industry, education, etc. Twelfth Step
   work is never paid for, but those who labor in service for
   us are worthy of their hire.

12                        C O N T E N T S

Tradition Nine                                                  172
   "A.A., as such, ought never be organized; but we may
   create    service   boards     or    committees    directly
   responsible to those they serve."
   Special service boards and committees. The General Ser-
   vice Conference, the board of trustees, and group commit-
   tees cannot issue directives to A.A. members or groups.
   A.A.'s can't be dictated to--individually or collectively.
   Absence of coercion works because unless each A.A. fol-
   lows suggested Steps to recovery, he signs his own death
   warrant. Same condition applies to the group. Suffering
   and love are A.A.'s disciplinarians. Difference between
   spirit of authority and spirit of service. Aim of our ser-
   vices is to bring sobriety within reach of all who want it.


Tradition Ten                                                   176
   "Alcoholics Anonymous has no opinion on outside
   issues; hence the A.A. name ought never be drawn into
   public controversy."
   A.A. does not take sides in any public controversy. Reluc-
   tance to fight is not a special virtue. Survival and spread
   of A.A. are our primary aims. Lessons learned from
   Washingtonian movement.


Tradition Eleven                                                180
   "Our public relations policy is based on attraction
   rather than promotion; we need always maintain
   personal anonymity at the level of press, radio and
   films."
   Public relations are important to A.A. Good public rela-
   tions save lives. We seek publicity for A.A. principles,
   not A.A. members. The press has cooperated. Personal
   anonymity at the public level is the cornerstone of our
   public relations policy. Eleventh Tradition is a constant
   reminder that personal ambition has no place in A.A.
   Each member becomes an active guardian of our Fellow-
   ship.

                         C O N T E N T S                       13


Tradition Twelve                                              184
   "Anonymity is the spiritual foundation of all our
   traditions, ever reminding us to place principles before
   personalities."
   Spiritual substance of anonymity is sacrifice. Subordinat-
   ing personal aims to the common good is the essence of
   all Twelve Traditions. Why A.A. could not remain a se-
   cret society. Principles come before personalities. One
   hundred percent anonymity at the public level. Anonymi-
   ty is real humility.


The Twelve Traditions--the Long Form                           189


                        Foreword



ALCOHOLICS           ANONYMOUS is a worldwide fellow-
ship of more than one hundred thousand alcoholic men
                                              *

and women who are banded together to solve their com-
mon problems and to help fellow sufferers in recoveryfrom
that age-old, baffling malady, alcoholism.
    This book deals with the "Twelve Steps" and the
"Twelve Traditions" of Alcoholics Anonymous. It presents
an explicit view of the principles by which A.A. members
recover and bywhich their Societyfunctions.
    A.A.'s Twelve Steps are a group of principles, spiritual
in their nature, which, if practiced as a way of life, can ex-
pelthe obsession to drink and enable the sufferer to become
happilyand usefullywhole.
    A.A.'s Twelve Traditions applyto the life ofthe Fellow-
ship itself. Theyoutline the means bywhich A.A. maintains
its unity and relates itself to the world about it, the way it
lives and grows.
    Though the essays which follow were written mainly
for members, it is thought by many of A.A.'s friends that
these pieces might arouse interest and find application out-
side ofA.A. itself.
    Many people, nonalcoholics, report that as a result of
the practice of A.A.'s Twelve Steps, they have been able to

  *In 2003 it is estimated that over two million have recovered
through A.A.
                               15

16                     F O R E W O R D

meet other difficulties of life. They think that the Twelve
Steps can mean more than sobriety for problem drinkers.
They see in them a way to happy and effective living for
many, alcoholic or not.
    There is, too, a rising interest in the Twelve Traditions
of Alcoholics Anonymous. Students of human relations are
beginning to wonder how and why A.A. functions as a so-
ciety. Whyis it, theyask, that in A.A. no member can be set
in personal authority over another, that nothing like a cen-
tral government can anywhere be seen? How can a set of
traditional principles, having no legal force at all, hold the
Fellowship of Alcoholics Anonymous in unity and effec-
tiveness? The second section of this volume, though
designed for A.A.'s membership, willgive such inquirers an
inside view ofA.A. never before possible.
    Alcoholics Anonymous began in 1935 in Akron, Ohio,
as the outcome of a meeting between a well-known sur-
geon and a New York broker. Both were severe cases of
alcoholismand were destined to become co-founders ofthe
A.A. Fellowship.
    The basic principles of A.A., as they are known today,
were borrowed mainly from the fields of religion and
medicine, though some ideas upon which success finally
depended were the result of noting the behavior and needs
of the Fellowship itself.
    After three years of trial and error in selecting the most
workable tenets upon which the Society could be based,
and after a large amount of failure in getting alcoholics to
recover, three successful groups emerged--the first at
Akron, the second in New York, and the third at Cleveland.

                       F O R E W O R D                       17

Even then it was hard to find twoscore of sure recoveries in
allthree groups.
    Nevertheless, the infant Societydetermined to set down
its experience in a book which finally reached the public in
April1939. At this time the recoveries numbered about one
hundred. The book was called "Alcoholics Anonymous"
and from it the Fellowship took its name. In it alcoholism
was described from the alcoholic's view, the spiritual idea
of the Society was codified for the first time in the Twelve
Steps, and the application of these Steps to the alcoholic's
dilemma was made clear. The remainder of the book was
devoted to thirty stories or case histories in which the alco-
holics described their drinking experiences and recoveries.
This established identification with alcoholic readers and
proved to them that the virtually impossible had become
possible. The book "Alcoholics Anonymous" became the
basic text of the Fellowship, and it still is. This present vol-
ume proposes to broaden and deepen the understanding of
the Twelve Steps as first written in the earlier work.
    With the publication of the book "Alcoholics Anony-
mous" in 1939, the pioneering period ended and a
prodigious chain reaction set in as recovered alcoholics car-
ried their message to still others. In the next years
alcoholics flocked to A.A. by tens of thousands, largely as
the result of excellent and continuous publicity freely given
by magazines and newspapers throughout the world. Cler-
gymen and doctors alike rallied to the new movement,
giving it unstinted support and endorsement.
    This startling expansion brought with it very severe
growing pains. Proof that alcoholics could recover had

18                       F O R E W O R D

been made. But it was by no means sure that such great
numbers of yet erratic people could live and work together
with harmonyand good effect.
    Everywhere there arose threatening questions of mem-
bership, money, personal relations, public relations,
management of groups, clubs, and scores of other perplexi-
ties. It was out of this vast welter of explosive experiences
that A.A.'sTwelve Traditions took formand were first pub-
lished in 1946 and later confirmed at A.A.'s First
International Convention held at Cleveland in 1950. The
Tradition section of this volume portrays in some detail the
experience which finally produced the Twelve Traditions
and so gave A.A. its present form, substance, and unity.
    As A.A. now enters maturity, it has begun to reach into
forty foreign lands. In the view of its friends, this is but the
                      *

beginning of its unique and valuable service.
    It is hoped that this volume will afford all who read it a
close-up view ofthe principles and forces which have made
Alcoholics Anonymous what it is.


          (A.A.'sGeneralServiceOfficemaybereachedbywriting:
                 AlcoholicsAnonymous,P.O.Box459,
           GrandCentralStation,NewYork,NY10163,U.S.A.)




  *In 2003, A.A. is established in approximately 150 countries.

THE TWELVE STEPS


                       Step One

        "We admitted we were powerless over alco-
        hol--that our lives had become unmanage-
        able."

WHO      cares to admit complete defeat?Practicallyno one,
ofcourse. Everynaturalinstinct cries out against the idea of
personal powerlessness. It is truly awful to admit that, glass
in hand, we have warped our minds into such an obsession
for destructive drinking that only an act of providence can
remove it fromus.
    No other kind of bankruptcy is like this one. Alcohol,
now become the rapacious creditor, bleeds us of all self-
sufficiencyand allwillto resist its demands. Once this stark
fact is accepted, our bankruptcy as going human concerns
is complete.
    But upon entering A.A. we soon take quite another
view of this absolute humiliation. We perceive that only
through utter defeat are we able to take our first steps to-
ward liberation and strength. Our admissions of personal
powerlessness finally turn out to be firm bedrock upon
which happyand purposefullives maybe built.
    We know that little good can come to any alcoholic
who joins A.A. unless he has first accepted his devastating
weakness and all its consequences. Until he so humbles
himself, his sobriety--if any--will be precarious. Of real
happiness he will find none at all. Proved beyond doubt by
an immense experience, this is one of the facts of A.A. life.

                             21

22                      S T E P   O N E

The principle that we shall find no enduring strength until
we first admit complete defeat is the main taproot from
whichour whole Societyhas sprung and flowered.
    When first challenged to admit defeat, most of us re-
volted. We had approached A.A. expecting to be taught
self-confidence. Then we had been told that so far as alco-
hol is concerned, self-confidence was no good whatever; in
fact, it was a total liability. Our sponsors declared that we
were the victims of a mental obsession so subtly powerful
that no amount of human willpower could break it. There
was, they said, no such thing as the personal conquest of
this compulsion by the unaided will. Relentlessly deepen-
ing our dilemma, our sponsors pointed out our increasing
sensitivity to alcohol--an allergy, they called it. The tyrant
alcohol wielded a double-edged sword over us: first we
were smitten byan insane urge that condemned us to go on
drinking, and then byan allergyof the bodythat insured we
would ultimately destroy ourselves in the process. Few in-
deed were those who, so assailed, had ever won through in
singlehanded combat. It was a statistical fact that alcoholics
almost never recovered on their own resources. And this
had been true, apparently, ever since man had first crushed
grapes.
    In A.A.'s pioneering time, none but the most desperate
cases could swallow and digest this unpalatable truth. Even
these "last-gaspers" often had difficulty in realizing how
hopeless they actually were. But a few did, and when these
laid hold of A.A. principles with all the fervor with which
the drowning seize life preservers, they almost invariably
got well. That is why the first edition of the book "Alco-

                        S T E P  O N E                     23

holicsAnonymous," published when our membership was
small, dealt with low-bottom cases only. Many less desper-
ate alcoholics tried A.A., but did not succeed because they
could not make the admission ofhopelessness.
    It is a tremendous satisfaction to record that in the fol-
lowing years this changed. Alcoholics who still had their
health, their families, their jobs, and even two cars in the
garage, began to recognize their alcoholism. As this trend
grew, theywere joined byyoung people who were scarcely
more than potential alcoholics. They were spared that last
ten or fifteen years of literal hell the rest of us had gone
through. Since Step One requires an admission that our
lives have become unmanageable, how could people such
as these take this Step?
    It was obviously necessary to raise the bottom the rest
of us had hit to the point where it would hit them. Bygoing
back in our own drinking histories, we could show that
years before we realized it we were out of control, that our
drinking even then was no mere habit, that it was indeed
the beginning of a fatal progression. To the doubters we
could say, "Perhaps you're not an alcoholic after all. Why
don't you try some more controlled drinking, bearing in
mind meanwhile what we have told you about
alcoholism?" This attitude brought immediate and practical
results. It was then discovered that when one alcoholic had
planted in the mind ofanother the true nature ofhis malady,
that person could never be the same again. Following every
spree, he would say to himself, "Maybe those A.A.'s were
right . . ." After a few such experiences, often years before
the onset of extreme difficulties, he would return to us con-

24                      S T E P   O N E

vinced. He had hit bottom as truly as any of us. John Barl-
eycorn himselfhad become our best advocate.
     Why all this insistence that every A.A. must hit bottom
first? The answer is that few people will sincerely try to
practice the A.A. program unless they have hit bottom. For
practicing A.A.'s remaining eleven Steps means the adop-
tion of attitudes and actions that almost no alcoholic who is
still drinking can dream of taking. Who wishes to be rigor-
ously honest and tolerant? Who wants to confess his faults
to another and make restitution for harm done? Who cares
anything about a Higher Power, let alone meditation and
prayer? Who wants to sacrifice time and energy in trying to
carry A.A.'s message to the next sufferer? No, the average
alcoholic, self-centered in the extreme, doesn't care for this
prospect--unless he has to do these things in order to stay
alive himself.
     Under the lash of alcoholism, we are driven to A.A.,
and there we discover the fatal nature of our situation.
Then, and only then, do we become as open-minded to
conviction and as willing to listen as the dying can be. We
stand ready to do anything which will lift the merciless ob-
session fromus.

                         Step Two

         "Came to believe that a Power greater than
         ourselves could restore us to sanity."




THE      moment they read Step Two, most A.A. newcomers
are confronted with a dilemma, sometimes a serious one.
How often have we heard them cry out, "Look what you
people have done to us! You have convinced us that we are
alcoholics and that our lives are unmanageable. Having re-
duced us to a state of absolute helplessness, you now
declare that none but a Higher Power can remove our ob-
session. Some of us won't believe in God, others can't, and
still others who do believe that God exists have no faith
whatever He will perform this miracle. Yes, you've got us
over the barrel, allright--but where do we go fromhere?"
    Let's look first at the case of the one who says he won't
believe--the belligerent one. He is in a state of mind which
can be described only as savage. His whole philosophy of
life, in which he so gloried, is threatened. It's bad enough,
he thinks, to admit alcohol has him down for keeps. But
now, still smarting from that admission, he is faced with
something really impossible. How he does cherish the
thought that man, risen so majestically from a single cell in
the primordial ooze, is the spearhead of evolution and
therefore the onlygod that his universe knows! Must he re-
nounce allthis to save himself?

                               25

26                      S T E P   T W O

    At this juncture, his A.A, sponsor usually laughs. This,
the newcomer thinks, is just about the last straw. This is the
beginning of the end. And so it is: the beginning of the end
of his old life, and the beginning of his emergence into a
new one. His sponsor probably says, "Take it easy. The
hoop you have to jump through is a lot wider than you
think. At least I've found it so. So did a friend of mine who
was a one-time vice-president of the American Atheist So-
ciety, but he got throughwithroomto spare."
    "Well," says the newcomer, "I know you're telling me
the truth. It's no doubt a fact that A.A, is full of people who
once believed as I do. But just how, in these circumstances,
does a fellow 'take it easy'?That's what I want to know."
    "That," agrees the sponsor, "is a very good question in-
deed. I think I can tell you exactly how to relax. You won't
have to work at it very hard, either. Listen, if you will, to
these three statements. First, Alcoholics Anonymous does
not demand that you believe anything. All of its Twelve
Steps are but suggestions. Second, to get sober and to stay
sober, you don't have to swallow allof Step Two right now.
Looking back, I find that I took it piecemeal myself. Third,
allyou reallyneed is a trulyopen mind. Just resign fromthe
debating societyand quit bothering yourself with such deep
questions as whether it was the hen or the egg that came
first. Again I say, allyou need is the open mind."
    The sponsor continues, "Take, for example, my own
case. I had a scientific schooling. Naturally I respected,
venerated, even worshiped science. As a matter of fact, I
still do--all except the worship part. Time after time, my
instructors held up to me the basic principle of all scientific

                       S T E P  T W O                     27

progress: search and research, again and again, always with
the open mind. When I first looked at A.A., my reaction
was just like yours. This A.A, business, I thought, is totally
unscientific. This I can't swallow. I simply won't consider
such nonsense.
    "Then I woke up. I had to admit that A.A, showed re-
sults, prodigious results. I saw that my attitude regarding
these had been anything but scientific. It wasn't A.A, that
had the closed mind, it was me. The minute I stopped argu-
ing, I could begin to see and feel. Right there, Step Two
gently and very gradually began to infiltrate my life. I can't
sayupon what occasion or upon what dayI came to believe
in a Power greater than myself, but I certainly have that be-
lief now. To acquire it, I had only to stop fighting and
practice the rest of A.A.'s program as enthusiastically as I
could.
    "This is onlyone man's opinion based on his own expe-
rience, of course. I must quickly assure you that A.A.'s
tread innumerable paths in their quest for faith. If you don't
care for the one I've suggested, you'll be sure to discover
one that suits if only you look and listen. Many a man like
you has begun to solve the problem by the method of sub-
stitution. You can, if you wish, make A.A., itself your
'higher power.' Here's a very large group of people who
have solved their alcohol problem. In this respect they are
certainly a power greater than you, who have not even
come close to a solution. Surelyyou can have faith in them.
Even this minimum of faith will be enough. You will find
many members who have crossed the threshold just this
way. All of them will tell you that, once across, their faith

28                       S T E P  T W O

broadened and deepened. Relieved of the alcohol obses-
sion, their lives unaccountably transformed, they came to
believe in a Higher Power, and most of them began to talk
ofGod."
    Consider next the plight of those who once had faith,
but have lost it. There will be those who have drifted into
indifference, those filled with self-sufficiency who have cut
themselves off, those who have become prejudiced against
religion, and those who are downright defiant because God
has failed to fulfill their demands. Can A.A, experience tell
allthese theymaystillfind a faith that works?
    Sometimes A.A, comes harder to those who have lost
or rejected faith than to those who never had anyfaith at all,
for they think they have tried faith and found it wanting.
They have tried the way of faith and the way of no faith.
Since both ways have proved bitterly disappointing, they
have concluded there is no place whatever for them to go.
The roadblocks of indifference, fancied self-sufficiency,
prejudice, and defiance often prove more solid and
formidable for these people than any erected by the uncon-
vinced agnostic or even the militant atheist. Religion says
the existence of God can be proved; the agnostic says it
can't be proved; and the atheist claims proofofthe nonexis-
tence of God. Obviously, the dilemma of the wanderer
from faith is that of profound confusion. He thinks himself
lost to the comfort of anyconviction at all. He cannot attain
in even a small degree the assurance of the believer, the ag-
nostic, or the atheist. He is the bewildered one.
    Any number of A.A.'s can say to the drifter, "Yes, we
were diverted fromour childhood faith, too. The overconfi-

                         S T E P T W O                      29

dence of youth was too much for us. Of course, we were
glad that good home and religious training had given us
certain values. We were still sure that we ought to be fairly
honest, tolerant, and just, that we ought to be ambitious and
hardworking. We became convinced that such simple rules
offair playand decencywould be enough.
    "As material success founded upon no more than these
ordinary attributes began to come to us, we felt we were
winning at the game of life. This was exhilarating, and it
made us happy. Why should we be bothered with theologi-
cal abstractions and religious duties, or with the state of our
souls here or hereafter? The here and now was good
enough for us. The will to win would carry us through. But
then alcohol began to have its way with us. Finally, when
all our score cards read 'zero,' and we saw that one more
strike would put us out of the game forever, we had to look
for our lost faith. It was inA.A, that we rediscovered it. And
so can you."
    Now we come to another kind of problem: the intellec-
tually self-sufficient man or woman. To these, manyA.A.'s
can say, "Yes, we were like you--far too smart for our own
good. We loved to have people callus precocious. We used
our education to blow ourselves up into prideful balloons,
though we were careful to hide this from others. Secretly,
we felt we could float above the rest of the folks on our
brainpower alone. Scientific progress told us there was
nothing man couldn't do. Knowledge was all-powerful. In-
tellect could conquer nature. Since we were brighter than
most folks (so we thought), the spoils of victory would be
ours for the thinking. The god ofintellect displaced the God

30                      S T E P T W O

of our fathers. But again John Barleycorn had other ideas.
We who had won so handsomely in a walk turned into all-
time losers. We saw that we had to reconsider or die. We
found many in A.A, who once thought as we did. They
helped us to get down to our right size. By their example
theyshowed us that humilityand intellect could be compat-
ible, provided we placed humility first. When we began to
do that, we received the gift of faith, a faith which works.
This faith is for you, too."
    Another crowd of A.A.'s says: "We were plumb dis-
gusted with religion and all its works. The Bible, we said,
was fullofnonsense; we could cite it chapter and verse, and
we couldn't see the Beatitudes for the 'begats.' In spots its
moralitywas impossiblygood; in others it seemed impossi-
bly bad. But it was the morality of the religionists
themselves that really got us down. We gloated over the
hypocrisy, bigotry, and crushing self-righteousness that
clung to so many 'believers' even in their Sunday best. How
we loved to shout the damaging fact that millions of the
'good men of religion' were still killing one another off in
the name of God. This all meant, of course, that we had
substituted negative for positive thinking. After we came to
A.A., we had to recognize that this trait had been an ego-
feeding proposition. In belaboring the sins of some reli-
gious people, we could feel superior to all of them.
Moreover, we could avoid looking at some of our own
shortcomings. Self-righteousness, the very thing that we
had contemptuouslycondemned in others, was our own be-
setting evil. This phony form of respectability was our
undoing, so far as faith was concerned. But finally, driven

                      S T E P  T W O                      31

to A.A., we learned better.
    "As psychiatrists have often observed, defiance is the
outstanding characteristic of many an alcoholic. So it's not
strange that lots of us have had our day at defying God
Himself. Sometimes it's because God has not delivered us
the good things oflife which we specified, as a greedychild
m makes an impossible list for Santa Claus. More often,
though, we had met up with some major calamity, and to
our way of thinking lost out because God deserted us. The
girl we wanted to marry had other notions; we prayed God
that she'd change her mind, but she didn't. We prayed for
healthy children, and were presented with sick ones, or
none at all. We prayed for promotions at business, and none
came. Loved ones, upon whomwe heartilydepended, were
taken from us by so-called acts of God. Then we became
drunkards, and asked God to stop that. But nothing hap-
pened. This was the unkindest cut of all. 'Damn this faith
business!' we said.
    "When we encountered A.A,, the fallacy of our defi-
ance was revealed. At no time had we asked what God's
will was for us; instead we had been telling Him what it
ought to be. No man, we saw, could believe in God and
defy Him, too. Belief meant reliance, not; defiance. In A.A,
we saw the fruits of this belief: men and women spared
from alcohol's final catastrophe. We saw them meet and
transcend their other pains and trials. We saw them calmly
accept impossible situations, seeking neither to run nor to
recriminate. This was not only faith; it was faith that
worked under allconditions. We soon concluded that what-
ever price in humilitywe must pay, we would pay."

32                     S T E P  T W O

    Now let's take the guy full of faith, but still reeking of
alcohol. He believes he is devout. His religious observance
is scrupulous. He's sure he still believes in God, but sus-
pects that God doesn't believe in him. He takes pledges and
more pledges. Following each, he not onlydrinks again, but
acts worse than the last time. Valiantlyhe tries to fight alco-
hol, imploring God's help, but the help doesn't come. What,
then, can be the matter?
    To clergymen, doctors, friends, and families, the alco-
holic who means well and tries hard is a heartbreaking
riddle. To most A.A.'s, he is not. There are too many of us
who have been just like him, and have found the riddle's
answer. This answer has to do with the quality of faith
rather than its quantity. This has been our blind spot. We
supposed we had humility when really we hadn't. We sup-
posed we had been serious about religious practices when,
upon honest appraisal, we found we had been only superfi-
cial. Or, going to the other extreme, we had wallowed in
emotionalism and had mistaken it for true religious feeling.
In both cases, we had been asking something for nothing.
The fact was we really hadn't cleaned house so that the
grace of God could enter us and expel the obsession. In no
deep or meaningful sense had we ever taken stock of our-
selves, made amends to those we had harmed, or freely
given to anyother human being without anydemand for re-
ward. We had not even prayed rightly. We had always said,
"Grant me my wishes" instead of "Thy will be done." The
love of God and man we understood not at all. Therefore
we remained self-deceived, and so incapable of receiving
enoughgrace to restore us to sanity.

                       S T E P  T W O                      33

   Few indeed are the practicing alcoholics who have any
idea how irrationaltheyare, or seeing their irrationality, can
bear to face it. Some will be willing to term themselves
"problem drinkers," but cannot endure the suggestion that
they are in fact mentally ill. They are abetted in this blind-
ness by a world which does not understand the difference
between sane drinking and alcoholism. "Sanity" is defined
as "soundness of mind." Yet no alcoholic, soberly analyz-
ing his destructive behavior, whether the destruction fell on
the dining-room furniture or his own moral fiber, can claim
"soundness ofmind" for himself.
   Therefore, Step Two is the rallying point for all of us.
Whether agnostic, atheist, or former believer, we can stand
together on this Step. True humility and an open mind can
lead us to faith, and everyA.A, meeting is an assurance that
God willrestore us to sanityifwe rightlyrelate ourselves to
Him.

                       Step Three

        "Made a decision to turn our will and our
        lives over to the care of God, as we under-
        stood Him."

PRACTICING         Step Three is like the opening of a door
which to all appearances is still closed and locked. All we
need is a key, and the decision to swing the door open.
There is onlyone key, and it is called willingness. Once un-
locked by willingness, the door opens almost of itself, and
looking through it, we shall see a pathway beside which is
an inscription. It reads: "This is the way to a faith that
works." In the first two Steps we were engaged in reflec-
tion. We saw that we were powerless over alcohol, but we
also perceived that faith of some kind, if only in A.A. itself,
is possible to anyone. These conclusions did not require ac-
tion; theyrequired onlyacceptance.
    Like all the remaining Steps, Step Three calls for affir-
mative action, for it is only by action that we can cut away
the self-will which has always blocked the entry of God--
or, if you like, a Higher Power--into our lives. Faith, to be
sure, is necessary, but faith alone can avail nothing. We can
have faith, yet keep God out of our lives. Therefore our
problem now becomes just how and by what specific
means shallwe be able to let Himin? Step Three represents
our first attempt to do this. In fact, the effectiveness of the
whole A.A. program will rest upon how well and earnestly
we have tried to come to "a decision to turn our will and

                               34

                       S T E P   T H R E E                  35

our lives over to the care ofGod as we understood Him."
     To every worldly and practical-minded beginner, this
Step looks hard, even impossible. No matter how much one
wishes to try, exactly how can he turn his own will and his
own life over to the care of whatever God he thinks there
is? Fortunately, we who have tried it, and with equal mis-
givings, can testify that anyone, anyone at all, can begin to
do it. We can further add that a beginning, even the small-
est, is all that is needed. Once we have placed the key of
willingness in the lock and have the door ever so slightly
open, we find that we can always open it some more.
Though self-will may slam it shut again, as it frequently
does, it will always respond the moment we again pick up
the keyof willingness.
     Maybe this all sounds mysterious and remote, some-
thing like Einstein's theory of relativity or a proposition in
nuclear physics. It isn't at all. Let's look at how practical it
actually is. Every man and woman who has joined A.A.
and intends to stick has, without realizing it, made a begin-
ning on Step Three. Isn't it true that in all matters touching
upon alcohol, each of them has decided to turn his or her
life over to the care, protection, and guidance of Alcoholics
Anonymous? Already a willingness has been achieved to
cast out one's own will and one's own ideas about the alco-
hol problem in favor of those suggested by A.A. Any
willing newcomer feels sure A.A. is the onlysafe harbor for
the foundering vessel he has become. Now if this is not
turning one's will and life over to a newfound Providence,
then what is it?
     But suppose that instinct still cries out, as it certainly

36                   S T E P   T H R E E

will, "Yes, respecting alcohol, I guess I have to be depen-
dent upon A.A., but in allother matters I must stillmaintain
my independence. Nothing is going to turn me into a
nonentity. If I keep on turning my life and my will over to
the care of Something or Somebodyelse, what willbecome
of me? I'll look like the hole in the doughnut." This, of
course, is the process by which instinct and logic always
seek to bolster egotism, and so frustrate spiritual develop-
ment. The trouble is that this kind of thinking takes no real
account of the facts. And the facts seem to be these: The
more we become willing to depend upon a Higher Power,
the more independent we actually are. Therefore depen-
dence, as A.A. practices it, is really a means of gaining true
independence ofthe spirit.
    Let's examine for a moment this idea of dependence at
the level of everyday living. In this area it is startling to dis-
cover how dependent we really are, and how unconscious
ofthat dependence. Everymodern house has electric wiring
carrying power and light to its interior. We are delighted
with this dependence; our main hope is that nothing will
ever cut off the supply of current. By so accepting our de-
pendence upon this marvel of science, we find ourselves
more independent personally. Not only are we more inde-
pendent, we are even more comfortable and secure. Power
flows just where it is needed. Silently and surely, electricity,
that strange energy so few people understand, meets our
simplest dailyneeds, and our most desperate ones, too. Ask
the polio sufferer confined to an iron lung who depends
with complete trust upon a motor to keep the breath of life
in him.

                     S T E P  T H R E E                    37

    But the moment our mental or emotional independence
is in question, how differently we behave. How persistently
we claim the right to decide all by ourselves just what we
shall think and just how we shall act. Oh yes, we'll weigh
the pros and cons of every problem. We'll listen politely to
those who would advise us, but all the decisions are to be
ours alone. Nobody is going to meddle with our personal
independence in such matters. Besides, we think, there is
no one we can surely trust. We are certain that our intelli-
gence, backed by willpower, can rightly control our inner
lives and guarantee us success in the world we live in. This
brave philosophy, wherein each man plays God, sounds
good in the speaking, but it still has to meet the acid test:
how well does it actually work? One good look in the mir-
ror ought to be answer enough for anyalcoholic.
    Should his own image in the mirror be too awful to
contemplate (and it usually is), he might first take a look at
the results normal people are getting from self-sufficiency.
Everywhere he sees people filled with anger and fear, soci-
etybreaking up into warring fragments. Each fragment says
to the others, "We are right and you are wrong." Everysuch
pressure group, if it is strong enough, self-righteously im-
poses its willupon the rest. And everywhere the same thing
is being done on an individual basis. The sum of all this
mighty effort is less peace and less brotherhood than be-
fore. The philosophy of self-sufficiency is not paying off.
Plainly enough, it is a bone-crushing juggernaut whose fi-
nal achievement is ruin.
    Therefore, we who are alcoholics can consider our-
selves fortunate indeed. Each of us has had his own near-

38                    S T E P   T H R E E

fatalencounter with the juggernaut ofself-will, and has suf-
fered enough under its weight to be willing to look for
something better. So it is by circumstance rather than by
any virtue that we have been driven to A.A., have admitted
defeat, have acquired the rudiments of faith, and now want
to make a decision to turn our will and our lives over to a
Higher Power.
   We realize that the word "dependence" is as distasteful
to many psychiatrists and psychologists as it is to alco-
holics. Like our professionalfriends, we, too, are aware that
there are wrong forms of dependence. We have experi-
enced many of them. No adult man or woman, for
example, should be in too much emotional dependence
upon a parent. They should have been weaned long before,
and if they have not been, they should wake up to the fact.
This very form of faulty dependence has caused many a re-
bellious alcoholic to conclude that dependence of any sort
must be intolerably damaging. But dependence upon an
A.A. group or upon a Higher Power hasn't produced any
balefulresults.
   When World War II broke out, this spiritual principle
had its first major test. A.A.'s entered the services and were
scattered allover the world. Would theybe able to take dis-
cipline, stand up under fire, and endure the monotony and
misery of war? Would the kind of dependence they had
learned in A.A. carry them through? Well, it did. They had
even fewer alcoholic lapses or emotionalbinges than A.A.'s
safe at home did. They were just as capable of endurance
and valor as anyother soldiers. Whether in Alaska or on the
Salerno beachhead, their dependence upon a Higher Power

                       S T E P   T H R E E                   39

worked. And far from being a weakness, this dependence
was their chiefsource ofstrength.
    So how, exactly, can the willing person continue to turn
his will and his life over to the Higher Power? He made a
beginning, we have seen, when he commenced to relyupon
A.A. for the solution of his alcohol problem. By now,
though, the chances are that he has become convinced that
he has more problems than alcohol, and that some of these
refuse to be solved by all the sheer personal determination
and courage he can muster. They simply will not budge;
they make him desperately unhappy and threaten his new-
found sobriety. Our friend is stillvictimized byremorse and
guilt when he thinks of yesterday. Bitterness still overpow-
ers him when he broods upon those he still envies or hates.
His financial insecurity worries him sick, and panic takes
over when he thinks of all the bridges to safety that alcohol
burned behind him. And how shall he ever straighten out
that awful jam that cost him the affection of his family and
separated him from them? His lone courage and unaided
will cannot do it. Surely he must now depend upon Some-
bodyor Something else.
    At first that "somebody" is likely to be his closest A.A.
friend. He relies upon the assurance that his many troubles,
now made more acute because he cannot use alcoholto kill
the pain, can be solved, too. Of course the sponsor points
out that our friend's life is still unmanageable even though
he is sober, that after all, onlya bare start on A.A.'s program
has been made. More sobriety brought about by the admis-
sion of alcoholism and by attendance at a few meetings is
very good indeed, but it is bound to be a far cry from per-

40                    S T E P  T H R E E

manent sobriety and a contented, useful life. That is just
where the remaining Steps of the A.A. program come in.
Nothing short of continuous action upon these as a way of
life can bring the much-desired result.
     Then it is explained that other Steps of the A.A. pro-
gram can be practiced with success only when Step Three
is given a determined and persistent trial. This statement
may surprise newcomers who have experienced nothing
but constant deflation and a growing conviction that human
will is of no value whatever. They have become persuaded,
and rightly so, that many problems besides alcohol will not
yield to a headlong assault powered bythe individualalone.
But now it appears that there are certain things which only
the individualcan do. A11 byhimself, and in the light ofhis
own circumstances, he needs to develop the qualityof will-
ingness. When he acquires willingness, he is the only one
who can make the decision to exert himself. Trying to do
this is an act of his own will. All of the Twelve Steps re-
quire sustained and personal exertion to conform to their
principles and so, we trust, to God's will.
     It is when we try to make our will conform with God's
that we begin to use it rightly. To all of us, this was a most
wonderful revelation. Our whole trouble had been the mis-
use of willpower. We had tried to bombard our problems
with it instead of attempting to bring it into agreement with
God's intention for us.To make this increasingly possible is
the purpose of A.A.'s Twelve Steps, and Step Three opens
the door.
     Once we have come into agreement with these ideas, it
is really easy to begin the practice of Step Three. In all

                      S T E P   T H R E E                 41

times of emotionaldisturbance or indecision, we can pause,
ask for quiet, and in the stillness simplysay: "God grant me
the serenityto accept the things I cannot change, courage to
change the things I can, and wisdom to know the differ-
ence. Thywill, not mine, be done."

                        Step Four

       "Made a searching and fearless moral in-
       ventory of ourselves."

CREATION        gave us instincts for a purpose. Without
them we wouldn't be complete human beings. If men and
women didn't exert themselves to be secure in their per-
sons, made no effort to harvest food or construct shelter,
there would be no survival. If they didn't reproduce, the
earth wouldn't be populated. If there were no socialinstinct,
if men cared nothing for the society of one another, there
would be no society. So these desires--for the sex relation,
for material and emotional security, and for companionship
--are perfectlynecessaryand right, and surelyGod-given.
    Yet these instincts, so necessary for our existence, often
far exceed their proper functions. Powerfully, blindly, many
times subtly, they drive us, dominate us, and insist upon
ruling our lives. Our desires for sex, for material and emo-
tional security, and for an important place in society often
tyrannize us. When thus out of joint, man's natural desires
cause him great trouble, practically all the trouble there is.
No human being, however good, is exempt from these
troubles. Nearly every serious emotional problem can be
seen as a case of misdirected instinct. When that happens,
our great naturalassets, the instincts, have turned into phys-
ical and mental liabilities.
    Step Four is our vigorous and painstaking effort to dis-
cover what these liabilities in each of us have been, and are.

                              42

                      S T E P   F O U R                    43

We want to find exactly how, when, and where our natural
desires have warped us. We wish to look squarelyat the un-
happiness this has caused others and ourselves. By
discovering what our emotional deformities are, we can
move toward their correction. Without a willing and persis-
tent effort to do this, there can be little sobriety or
contentment for us. Without a searching and fearless moral
inventory, most of us have found that the faith which really
works in dailyliving is stillout ofreach.
    Before tackling the inventory problem in detail, let's
have a closer look at what the basic problem is. Simple ex-
amples like the following take on a world of meaning when
we think about them. Suppose a person places sex desire
ahead ofeverything else. In such a case, this imperious urge
can destroy his chances for material and emotional security
as well as his standing in the community. Another may de-
velop such an obsession for financial security that he wants
to do nothing but hoard money. Going to the extreme, he
can become a miser, or even a recluse who denies himself
both familyand friends.
    Nor is the quest for security always expressed in terms
of money. How frequently we see a frightened human be-
ing determined to depend completely upon a stronger
person for guidance and protection. This weak one, failing
to meet life's responsibilities with his own resources, never
grows up. Disillusionment and helplessness are his lot. In
time allhis protectors either flee or die, and he is once more
left alone and afraid.
    We have also seen men and women who go power-
mad, who devote themselves to attempting to rule their fel-

44                      S T E P F O U R

lows. These people often throw to the winds every chance
for legitimate security and a happy family life. Whenever a
human being becomes a battleground for the instincts, there
can be no peace.
    But that is not allofthe danger. Everytime a person im-
poses his instincts unreasonably upon others, unhappiness
follows. If the pursuit of wealth tramples upon people who
happen to be in the way, then anger, jealousy, and revenge
are likely to be aroused. If sex runs riot, there is a similar
uproar. Demands made upon other people for too much at-
tention, protection, and love can only invite domination or
revulsion in the protectors themselves--two emotions quite
as unhealthy as the demands which evoked them. When an
individual's desire for prestige becomes uncontrollable,
whether in the sewing circle or at the international confer-
ence table, other people suffer and often revolt. This
collision of instincts can produce anything froma cold snub
t to a blazing revolution. In these ways we are set in conflict
not onlywith ourselves, but with other people who have in-
stincts, too.
    Alcoholics especially should be able to see that instinct
run wild in themselves is the underlying cause of their de-
structive drinking. We have drunk to drown feelings offear,
frustration, and depression. We have drunk to escape the
guilt of passions, and then have drunk again to make more
passions possible. We have drunk for vainglory--that we
might the more enjoy foolish dreams of pomp and power.
This perverse soul-sickness is not pleasant to look upon. In-
stincts on rampage balk at investigation. The minute we
make a serious attempt to probe them, we are liable to suf-

                       S T E P  F O U R                    45

fer severe reactions.
    If temperamentally we are on the depressive side, we
are apt to be swamped with guilt and self-loathing. We wal-
low in this messy bog, often getting a misshapen and
painful pleasure out of it. As we morbidly pursue this
melancholy activity, we may sink to such a point of despair
that nothing but oblivion looks possible as a solution. Here,
of course, we have lost all perspective, and therefore all
genuine humility. For this is pride in reverse. This is not a
moral inventory at all; it is the very process by which the
depressive has so often been led to the bottle and extinction.
    If, however, our natural disposition is inclined to self-
righteousness or grandiosity, our reaction will be just the
opposite. We will be offended at A.A.'s suggested invento-
ry. No doubt we shall point with pride to the good lives we
thought we led before the bottle cut us down. We shall
claimthat our serious character defects, ifwe think we have
any at all, have been caused chiefly by excessive drinking.
This being so, we think it logically follows that sobriety--
first, last, and all the time--is the only thing we need to
work for. We believe that our one-time good characters will
be revived the moment we quit alcohol. If we were pretty
nice people all along, except for our drinking, what need is
there for a moralinventorynow that we are sober?
    We also clutch at another wonderful excuse for avoid-
ing an inventory. Our present anxieties and troubles, we cry,
are caused by the behavior of other people--people who
really need a moral inventory. We firmly believe that if
only they'd treat us better, we'd be all right. Therefore we
think our indignation is justified and reasonable--that our

46                      S T E P   F O U R

resentments are the "right kind." We aren't the guilty ones.
They are!
     At this stage of the inventory proceedings, our sponsors
come to the rescue. They can do this, for they are the carri-
ers of A.A.'s tested experience with Step Four. They
comfort the melancholy one by first showing him that his
case is not strange or different, that his character defects are
probablynot more numerous or worse than those ofanyone
else in A.A. This the sponsor promptly proves by talking
freely and easily, and without exhibitionism, about his own
defects, past and present. This calm, yet realistic, stocktak-
ing is immensely reassuring. The sponsor probably points
out that the newcomer has some assets which can be noted
along with his liabilities. This tends to clear awaymorbidity
and encourage balance. As soon as he begins to be more
objective, the newcomer can fearlessly, rather than fearful-
ly, look at his own defects.
     The sponsors of those who feel they need no inventory
are confronted with quite another problem. This is because
people who are driven by pride of self unconsciously blind
themselves to their liabilities. These newcomers scarcely
need comforting. The problem is to help them discover a
chink in the walls their ego has built, through which the
light ofreason can shine.
     First off, they can be told that the majority of A.A.
members have suffered severely from self-justification dur-
ing their drinking days. For most of us, self-justification
was the maker of excuses; excuses, of course, for drinking,
and for all kinds of crazy and damaging conduct. We had
made the invention of alibis a fine art. We had to drink be-

                      S T E P   F O U R                   47

cause times were hard or times were good. We had to drink
because at home we were smothered with love or got none
at all. We had to drink because at work we were great suc-
cesses or dismal failures. We had to drink because our
nation had won a war or lost a peace. And so it went, ad in-
finitum.
    We thought "conditions" drove us to drink, and when
we tried to correct these conditions and found that we
couldn't to our entire satisfaction, our drinking went out of
hand and we became alcoholics. It never occurred to us that
we needed to change ourselves to meet conditions, whatev-
er theywere.
    But in A.A. we slowlylearned that something had to be
done about our vengeful resentments, self-pity, and unwar-
ranted pride. We had to see that every time we played the
big shot, we turned people against us. We had to see that
when we harbored grudges and planned revenge for such
defeats, we were really beating ourselves with the club of
anger we had intended to use on others. We learned that if
we were seriouslydisturbed, our first need was to quiet that
disturbance, regardless of who or what we thought caused
it.
    To see how erratic emotions victimized us often took a
long time. We could perceive them quickly in others, but
only slowly in ourselves. First of all, we had to admit that
we had many of these defects, even though such disclo-
sures were painful and humiliating. Where other people
were concerned, we had to drop the word "blame" from
our speech and thought. This required great willingness
even to begin. But once over the first two or three high hur-

48                      S T E P   F O U R

dles, the course ahead began to look easier. For we had
started to get perspective on ourselves, which is another
wayofsaying that we were gaining in humility.
    Of course the depressive and the power-driver are per-
sonality extremes, types with which A.A. and the whole
world abound. Often these personalities are just as sharply
defined as the examples given. But just as often some of us
will fit more or less into both classifications. Human beings
are never quite alike, so each of us, when making an inven-
tory, will need to determine what his individual character
defects are. Having found the shoes that fit, he ought to step
into themand walk with new confidence that he is at last on
the right track.
    Now let's ponder the need for a list of the more glaring
personality defects all of us have in varying degrees. To
those having religious training, such a list would set forth
serious violations of moral principles. Some others will
think of this list as defects of character. Still others will call
it an index of maladjustments. Some will become quite an-
noyed if there is talk about immorality, let alone sin. But all
who are in the least reasonable will agree upon one point:
that there is plenty wrong with us alcoholics about which
plenty will have to be done if we are to expect sobriety,
progress, and anyrealabilityto cope with life.
    To avoid falling into confusion over the names these
defects should be called, let's take a universally recognized
list of major human failings--the Seven Deadly Sins of
pride, greed, lust, anger, gluttony, envy, and sloth. It is not
by accident that pride heads the procession. For pride, lead-
ing to self-justification, and always spurred byconscious or

                       S T E P  F O U R                     49

unconscious fears, is the basic breeder of most human diffi-
culties, the chief block to true progress. Pride lures us into
making demands upon ourselves or upon others which can-
not be met without perverting or misusing our God-given
instincts. When the satisfaction of our instincts for sex, se-
curity, and society becomes the sole object of our lives,
then pride steps in to justifyour excesses.
    All these failings generate fear, a soul-sickness in its
own right. Then fear, in turn, generates more character de-
fects. Unreasonable fear that our instincts will not be
satisfied drives us to covet the possessions of others, to lust
for sex and power, to become angry when our instinctive
demands are threatened, to be envious when the ambitions
of others seem to be realized while ours are not. We eat,
drink, and grab for more of everything than we need, fear-
ing we shallnever have enough. And with genuine alarmat
the prospect of work, we stay lazy. We loaf and procrasti-
nate, or at best work grudgingly and under half steam.
These fears are the termites that ceaselessly devour the
foundations ofwhatever sort oflife we tryto build.
    So when A.A. suggests a fearless moral inventory, it
must seem to every newcomer that more is being asked of
him than he can do. Both his pride and his fear beat him
back every time he tries to look within himself. Pride says,
"You need not pass this way," and Fear says, "You dare not
look!" But the testimony of A.A.'s who have really tried a
moralinventoryis that pride and fear of this sort turn out to
be bogeymen, nothing else. Once we have a complete will-
ingness to take inventory, and exert ourselves to do the job
thoroughly, a wonderful light falls upon this foggy scene.

50                     S T E P    F O U R

As we persist, a brand-new kind of confidence is born, and
the sense of relief at finally facing ourselves is indescrib-
able. These are the first fruits ofStep Four.
    By now the newcomer has probably arrived at the fol-
lowing conclusions: that his character defects, representing
instincts gone astray, have been the primary cause of his
drinking and his failure at life; that unless he is now willing
to work hard at the elimination of the worst of these de-
fects, both sobriety and peace of mind will still elude him;
that all the faulty foundation of his life will have to be torn
out and built anew on bedrock. Now willing to commence
the search for his own defects, he will ask, "Just how do I
go about this?How do I take inventoryofmyself?"
    Since Step Four is but the beginning of a lifetime prac-
tice, it can be suggested that he first have a look at those
personal flaws which are acutely troublesome and fairly
obvious. Using his best judgment of what has been right
and what has been wrong, he might make a rough surveyof
his conduct with respect to his primary instincts for sex, se-
curity, and society. Looking back over his life, he can
readilyget under waybyconsideration of questions such as
these:
    When, and how, and in just what instances did my self-
ish pursuit of the sex relation damage other people and me?
What people were hurt, and how badly? Did I spoil my
marriage and injure my children? Did I jeopardize my
standing in the community? Just how did I react to these
situations at the time? Did I burn with a guilt that nothing
could extinguish? Or did I insist that I was the pursued and
not the pursuer, and thus absolve myself? How have I re-

                       S T E P  F O U R                   51

acted to frustration in sexual matters? When denied, did I
become vengeful or depressed? Did I take it out on other
people? Ifthere was rejection or coldness at home, did I use
this as a reason for promiscuity?
    Also of importance for most alcoholics are the ques-
tions they must ask about their behavior respecting
financial and emotional security. In these areas fear, greed,
possessiveness, and pride have too often done their worst.
Surveying his business or employment record, almost any
alcoholic can ask questions like these: In addition to my
drinking problem, what character defects contributed to my
financial instability? Did fear and inferiority about my fit-
ness for my job destroy my confidence and fill me with
conflict? Did I try to cover up those feelings of inadequacy
by bluffing, cheating, lying, or evading responsibility? Or
by griping that others failed to recognize my truly excep-
tional abilities? Did I overvalue myself and play the big
shot? Did I have such unprincipled ambition that I double-
crossed and undercut my associates? Was I extravagant?
Did I recklessly borrow money, caring little whether it was
repaid or not? Was I a pinch penny, refusing to support my
family properly? Did I cut corners financially? What about
the "quick money" deals, the stock market, and the races?
    Businesswomen in A.A. willnaturallyfind that manyof
these questions applyto them, too. But the alcoholic house-
wife can also make the family financially insecure. She can
juggle charge accounts, manipulate the food budget, spend
her afternoons gambling, and run her husband into debt by
irresponsibility, waste, and extravagance.
    But all alcoholics who have drunk themselves out of

52                     S T E P  F O U R

jobs, family, and friends will need to cross-examine them-
selves ruthlessly to determine how their own personality
defects have thus demolished their security.
     The most common symptoms of emotional insecurity
are worry, anger, self-pity, and depression. These stemfrom
causes which sometimes seem to be within us, and at other
t times to come from without. To take inventory in this re-
spect we ought to consider carefully all personal
relationships which bring continuous or recurring trouble. It
should be remembered that this kind ofinsecuritymayarise
in any area where instincts are threatened. Questioning di-
rected to this end might run like this: Looking at both past
and present, what sex situations have caused me anxiety,
bitterness, frustration, or depression?Appraising eachsitua-
tion fairly, can I see where I have been at fault? Did these
perplexities beset me because of selfishness or unreason-
able demands? Or, if mydisturbance was seeminglycaused
bythe behavior ofothers, whydo I lack the abilityto accept
conditions I cannot change? These are the sort of funda-
mental inquiries that can disclose the source of my
discomfort and indicate whether I may be able to alter my
own conduct and so adjust myself serenely to self-disci-
pline.
     Suppose that financial insecurity constantly arouses
these same feelings. I can ask myself to what extent have
my own mistakes fed my gnawing anxieties. And if the ac-
tions of others are part of the cause, what can I do about
that? If I am unable to change the present state of affairs,
am I willing to take the measures necessary to shape my
life to conditions as they are? Questions like these, more of

                       S T E P   F O U R                   53

which willcome to mind easilyin each individualcase, will
help turn up the root causes.
    But it is from our twisted relations with family, friends,
and society at large that many of us have suffered the most.
We have been especially stupid and stubborn about them.
The primaryfact that we failto recognize is our totalinabil-
ity to form a true partnership with another human being.
Our egomania digs two disastrous pitfalls. Either we insist
upon dominating the people we know, or we depend upon
them far too much. If we lean too heavily on people, they
willsooner or later failus, for theyare human, too, and can-
not possibly meet our incessant demands. In this way our
insecuritygrows and festers. When we habituallytryto ma-
nipulate others to our own willful desires, they revolt, and
resist us heavily. Then we develop hurt feelings, a sense of
persecution, and a desire to retaliate. As we redouble our ef-
forts at control, and continue to fail, our suffering becomes
acute and constant. We have not once sought to be one in a
family, to be a friend among friends, to be a worker among
workers, to be a useful member of society. Always we tried
to struggle to the top of the heap, or to hide underneath it.
This self-centered behavior blocked a partnership relation
with anyone ofthose about us. Oftrue brotherhood we had
smallcomprehension.
    Some will object to many of the questions posed, be-
cause they think their own character defects have not been
so glaring. To these it can be suggested that a conscientious
examination is likely to reveal the very defects the objec-
tionable questions are concerned with. Because our surface
record hasn't looked too bad, we have frequently been

54                      S T E P F O U R

abashed to find that this is so simply because we have
buried these self same defects deep down in us under thick
layers of self-justification. Whatever the defects, they have
finallyambushed us into alcoholismand misery.
   Therefore, thoroughness ought to be the watchword
when taking inventory. In this connection, it is wise to write
out our questions and answers. It will be an aid to clear
thinking and honest appraisal. It will be the first tangible
evidence ofour complete willingness to move forward.

                         Step Five

       "Admitted to God, to ourselves, and to an-
       other human being the exact nature of our
       wrongs."

ALL    OFA.A.'s Twelve Steps ask us to go contraryto our
natural desires . . . they all deflate our egos. When it comes
to ego deflation, few Steps are harder to take than Five. But
scarcely any Step is more necessary to longtime sobriety
and peace ofmind than this one.
   A.A. experience has taught us we cannot live alone
with our pressing problems and the character defects which
cause or aggravate them. If we have swept the searchlight
of Step Four back and forth over our careers, and it has re-
vealed in stark relief those experiences we'd rather not
remember, if we have come to know how wrong thinking
and action have hurt us and others, then the need to quit liv-
ing by ourselves with those tormenting ghosts of yesterday
gets more urgent than ever. We have to talk to somebody
about them.
   So intense, though, is our fear and reluctance to do this,
that many A.A.'s at first try to bypass Step Five. We search
for an easier way--which usually consists of the general
and fairly painless admission that when drinking we were
sometimes bad actors. Then, for good measure, we add dra-
matic descriptions of that part of our drinking behavior
which our friends probablyknow about anyhow.
   But of the things which really bother and burn us, we

                                55

56                     S T E P   F I V E

say nothing. Certain distressing or humiliating memories,
we tell ourselves, ought not be shared with anyone. These
willremain our secret. Not a soulmust ever know. We hope
they'llgo to the grave with us.
    Yet if A.A.'s experience means anything at all, this is
not only unwise, but is actually a perilous resolve. Few
muddled attitudes have caused us more trouble than hold-
ing back on Step Five. Some people are unable to stay
sober at all; others will relapse periodically until they really
clean house. Even A.A. old timers, sober for years, often
pay dearly for skimping this Step. They will tell how they
tried to carry the load alone; how much they suffered of ir-
ritability, anxiety, remorse, and depression; and how,
unconsciously seeking relief, they would sometimes accuse
even their best friends of the very character defects they
themselves were trying to conceal. Theyalways discovered
that relief never came by confessing the sins of other peo-
ple. Everybodyhad to confess his own.
    This practice of admitting one's defects to another per-
son is, of course, very ancient. It has been validated in
every century, and it characterizes the lives of all spiritually
centered and trulyreligious people. But todayreligion is by
no means the sole advocate of this saving principle. Psychi-
atrists and psychologists point out the deep need every
human being has for practical insight and knowledge of his
own personality flaws and for a discussion of them with an
understanding and trustworthy person. So far as alcoholics
are concerned, A.A. would go even further. Most of us
would declare that without a fearless admission of our de-
fects to another human being we could not stay sober. It

                        S T E P F I V E                    57

seems plain that the grace ofGod willnot enter to expelour
destructive obsessions untilwe are willing to trythis.
    What are we likely to receive from Step Five? For one
thing, we shall get rid of that terrible sense of isolation
we've always had. Almost without exception, alcoholics are
tortured by loneliness. Even before our drinking got bad
and people began to cut us off, nearly all of us suffered the
feeling that we didn't quite belong. Either we were shy, and
dared not draw near others, or we were apt to be noisygood
fellows craving attention and companionship, but never
getting it--at least to our way of thinking. There was al-
ways that mysterious barrier we could neither surmount nor
understand. It was as if we were actors on a stage, suddenly
realizing that we did not know a single line of our parts.
That's one reason we loved alcoholtoo well. It did let us act
extemporaneously. But even Bacchus boomeranged on us;
we were finallystruck down and left in terrified loneliness.
    When we reached A.A., and for the first time in our
lives stood among people who seemed to understand, the
sense of belonging was tremendously exciting. We thought
the isolation problemhad been solved. But we soon discov-
ered that while we weren't alone anymore in a socialsense,
we still suffered many of the old pangs of anxious apart-
ness. Until we had talked with complete candor of our
conflicts, and had listened to someone else do the same
thing, we still didn't belong. Step Five was the answer. It
was the beginning oftrue kinship with man and God.
    This vital Step was also the means by which we began
to get the feeling that we could be forgiven, no matter what
we had thought or done. Often it was while working on this

58                    S T E P  F I V E

Step with our sponsors or spiritualadvisers that we first felt
truly able to forgive others, no matter how deeply we felt
they had wronged us. Our moral inventory had persuaded
us that all-round forgiveness was desirable, but it was only
when we resolutely tackled Step Five that we inwardly
knew we'd be able to receive forgiveness and give it, too.
    Another great dividend we may expect from confiding
our defects to another human being is humility--a word of-
ten misunderstood. To those who have made progress in
A.A., it amounts to a clear recognition of what and who we
really are, followed by a sincere attempt to become what
we could be. Therefore, our first practicalmove toward hu-
mility must consist of recognizing our deficiencies. No
defect can be corrected unless we clearly see what it is. But
we shall have to do more than see. The objective look at
ourselves we achieved in Step Four was, after all, only a
look. All of us saw, for example, that we lacked honesty
and tolerance, that we were beset at times byattacks ofself-
pity or delusions of personal grandeur. But while this was a
humiliating experience, it didn't necessarily mean that we
had yet acquired much actual humility. Though now recog-
nized, our defects were still there. Something had to be
done about them. And we soon found that we could not
wish or willthemawaybyourselves.
    More realism and therefore more honesty about our-
selves are the great gains we make under the influence of
Step Five. As we took inventory, we began to suspect how
much trouble self-delusion had been causing us. This had
brought a disturbing reflection. If all our lives we had more
or less fooled ourselves, how could we now be so sure that

                       S T E P  F I V E                    59

we weren't still self-deceived? How could we be certain
that we had made a true catalog ofour defects and had real-
ly admitted them, even to ourselves? Because we were still
bothered byfear, self-pity, and hurt feelings, it was probable
we couldn't appraise ourselves fairly at all. Too much guilt
and remorse might cause us to dramatize and exaggerate
our shortcomings. Or anger and hurt pride might be the
smoke screen under which we were hiding some of our de-
fects while we blamed others for them. Possibly, too, we
were still handicapped by many liabilities, great and small,
we never knew we had.
    Hence it was most evident that a solitary self-appraisal,
and the admission of our defects based upon that alone,
wouldn't be nearly enough. We'd have to have outside help
if we were surely to know and admit the truth about our-
selves--the help of God and another human being. Onlyby
discussing ourselves, holding back nothing, only by being
willing to take advice and accept direction could we set foot
on the road to straight thinking, solid honesty, and genuine
humility.
    Yet many of us still hung back. We said, "Why can't
'God as we understand Him' tell us where we are astray? If
the Creator gave us our lives in the first place, then He must
know in every detail where we have since gone wrong.
Why don't we make our admissions to Him directly? Why
do we need to bring anyone else into this?"
    At this stage, the difficulties of trying to deal rightly
with God by ourselves are twofold. Though we may at first
be startled to realize that God knows all about us, we are
apt to get used to that quite quickly. Somehow, being alone

60                      S T E P F I V E

with God doesn't seem as embarrassing as facing up to an-
other person. Until we actually sit down and talk aloud
about what we have so long hidden, our willingness to
clean house is still largely theoretical. When we are honest
with another person, it confirms that we have been honest
withourselves and withGod.
    The second difficulty is this: what comes to us alone
may be garbled by our own rationalization and wishful
thinking. The benefit of talking to another person is that we
can get his direct comment and counsel on our situation,
and there can be no doubt in our minds what that advice is.
Going it alone in spiritual matters is dangerous. How many
times have we heard well-intentioned people claim the
guidance of God when it was all too plain that they were
sorely mistaken. Lacking both practice and humility, they
had deluded themselves and were able to justify the most
arrant nonsense on the ground that this was what God had
told them. It is worth noting that people of very high spiri-
tual development almost always insist on checking with
friends or spiritualadvisers the guidance theyfeeltheyhave
received from God. Surely, then, a novice ought not lay
himself open to the chance of making foolish, perhaps trag-
ic, blunders in this fashion. While the comment or advice of
others may be by no means infallible, it is likely to be far
more specific than any direct guidance we may receive
while we are still so inexperienced in establishing contact
witha Power greater thanourselves.
    Our next problem will be to discover the person in
whomwe are to confide. Here we ought to take much care,
remembering that prudence is a virtue which carries a high

                       S T E P    F I V E                   61

rating. Perhaps we shallneed to share with this person facts
about ourselves which no others ought to know. We shall
want to speak with someone who is experienced, who not
onlyhas stayed drybut has been able to surmount other se-
rious difficulties. Difficulties, perhaps, like our own. This
person mayturn out to be one's sponsor, but not necessarily
so. If you have developed a high confidence in him, and his
temperament and problems are close to your own, then
such a choice will be good. Besides, your sponsor already
has the advantage ofknowing something about your case.
    Perhaps, though, your relation to him is such that you
would care to reveal only a part of your story. If this is the
situation, by all means do so, for you ought to make a be-
ginning as soon as you can. It may turn out, however, that
you'll choose someone else for the more difficult and deep-
er revelations. This individual may be entirely outside of
A.A.--for example, your clergyman or your doctor. For
some ofus, a complete stranger mayprove the best bet.
    The real tests of the situation are your own willingness
to confide and your full confidence in the one with whom
you share your first accurate self-survey. Even when you've
found the person, it frequently takes great resolution to ap-
proach him or her. No one ought to say the A.A. program
requires no willpower; here is one place you may require
all you've got. Happily, though, the chances are that you
will be in for a very pleasant surprise. When your mission
is carefully explained, and it is seen by the recipient of your
confidence how helpful he can really be, the conversation
will start easily and will soon become eager. Before long,
your listener may well tell a story or two about himself

62                   S T E P  F I V E

which will place you even more at ease. Provided you hold
back nothing, your sense of relief will mount from minute
to minute. The dammed-up emotions of years break out of
their confinement, and miraculously vanish as soon as they
are exposed. As the pain subsides, a healing tranquility
takes its place. And when humilityand serenityare so com-
bined, something else of great moment is apt to occur.
Manyan A.A., once agnostic or atheistic, tells us that it was
during this stage of Step Five that he first actually felt the
presence of God. And even those who had faith already of-
ten become conscious ofGod as theynever were before.
    This feeling of being at one with God and man, this
emerging from isolation through the open and honest shar-
ing of our terrible burden of guilt, brings us to a resting
place where we may prepare ourselves for the following
Steps toward a fulland meaningfulsobriety.

                          Step Six

        "Were entirely ready to have God remove
        all these defects of character."

"THIS     is the Step that separates the men from the boys."
So declares a well-loved clergyman who happens to be one
of A.A.'s greatest friends. He goes on to explain that any
person capable of enough willingness and honestyto tryre-
peatedly Step Six on all his faults--without any
reservations whatever--has indeed come a long way spiri-
tually, and is therefore entitled to be called a man who is
sincerely trying to grow in the image and likeness of his
ownCreator.
    Of course, the often disputed question of whether God
can--and will, under certain conditions--remove defects
of character will be answered with a prompt affirmative by
almost any A.A. member. To him, this proposition will be
no theory at all; it will be just about the largest fact in his
life. He willusuallyoffer his proof in a statement like this:
    "Sure, I was beaten, absolutely licked. My own
willpower just wouldn't work on alcohol. Change of scene,
the best efforts of family, friends, doctors, and clergymen
got no place with my alcoholism. I simply couldn't stop
drinking, and no human being could seem to do the job for
me. But when I became willing to clean house and then
asked a Higher Power, God as I understood Him, to give
me release, my obsession to drink vanished. It was lifted
right out ofme."

                               63

64                        S T E P   S I X

    In A.A. meetings allover the world, statements just like
this are heard daily. It is plain for everybodyto see that each
sober A.A. member has been granted a release from this
very obstinate and potentially fatal obsession. So in a very
complete and literal way, all A.A.'s have "become entirely
ready" to have God remove the mania for alcohol from
their lives. And God has proceeded to do exactlythat.
    Having been granted a perfect release from alcoholism,
why then shouldn't we be able to achieve by the same
means a perfect release from every other difficulty or de-
fect? This is a riddle of our existence, the full answer to
which may be only in the mind of God. Nevertheless, at
least a part ofthe answer to it is apparent to us.
    When men and women pour so much alcohol into
themselves that theydestroytheir lives, theycommit a most
unnatural act. Defying their instinctive desire for self-
preservation, they seem bent upon self-destruction. They
work against their own deepest instinct. As they are hum-
bled by the terrific beating administered by alcohol, the
grace of God can enter them and expel their obsession.
Here their powerful instinct to live can cooperate fully with
their Creator's desire to give them new life. For nature and
God alike abhor suicide.
    But most of our other difficulties don't fall under such a
category at all. Every normal person wants, for example, to
eat, to reproduce, to be somebody in the society of his fel-
lows. And he wishes to be reasonably safe and secure as he
tries to attain these things. Indeed, God made him that way.
He did not design man to destroy himself by alcohol, but
He did give man instincts to help himto stayalive.

                         S T E P  S I X                      65

     It is nowhere evident, at least in this life, that our Cre-
ator expects us fully to eliminate our instinctual drives. So
far as we know, it is nowhere on the record that God has
completely removed from any human being all his natural
drives.
     Since most of us are born with an abundance of natural
desires, it isn't strange that we often let these far exceed
their intended purpose. When they drive us blindly, or we
willfully demand that they supply us with more satisfac-
tions or pleasures than are possible or due us, that is the
point at which we depart from the degree of perfection that
God wishes for us here on earth. That is the measure of our
character defects, or, ifyou wish, ofour sins.
     If we ask, God will certainly forgive our derelictions.
But in no case does He render us white as snow and keep
us that way without our cooperation. That is something we
are supposed to be willing to work toward ourselves. He
asks only that we try as best we know how to make
progress inthe building ofcharacter.
     So Step Six--"Were entirelyreadyto have God remove
all these defects of character"--is A.A.'s way of stating the
best possible attitude one can take in order to make a begin-
ning on this lifetime job. This does not mean that we expect
all our character defects to be lifted out of us as the drive to
drink was. A few of them may be, but with most of them
we shall have to be content with patient improvement. The
key words "entirely ready" underline the fact that we want
to aimat the verybest we know or can learn.
     How many of us have this degree of readiness? In an
absolute sense practically nobody has it. The best we can

66                        S T E P    S I X

do, with all the honesty that we can summon, is to try to
have it. Even then the best ofus willdiscover to our dismay
that there is always a sticking point, a point at which we
say, "No, I can't give this up yet." And we shalloften tread
on even more dangerous ground when we cry, "This I will
never give up!" Such is the power of our instincts to over-
reach themselves. No matter how far we have progressed,
desires will always be found which oppose the grace of
God.
    Some who feel they have done well may dispute this,
so let's try to think it through a little further. Practically ev-
ery body wishes to be rid of his most glaring and
destructive handicaps. No one wants to be so proud that he
is scorned as a braggart, nor so greedy that he is labeled a
thief. No one wants to be angry enough to murder, lustful
enough to rape, gluttonous enough to ruin his health. No
one wants to be agonized by the chronic pain of envy or to
be paralyzed by sloth. Of course, most human beings don't
suffer these defects at these rock-bottomlevels.
    We who have escaped these extremes are apt to con-
gratulate ourselves. Yet can we?After all, hasn't it been self-
interest, pure and simple, that has enabled most of us to es-
cape? Not much spiritual effort is involved in avoiding
excesses which will bring us punishment anyway. But
when we face up to the less violent aspects of these very
same defects, then where do we stand?
    What we must recognize now is that we exult in some
of our defects. We really love them. Who, for example,
doesn't like to feel just a little superior to the next fellow, or
even quite a lot superior? Isn't it true that we like to let

                         S T E P  S I X                   67

greed masquerade as ambition? To think of liking lust
seems impossible. But how many men and women speak
love with their lips, and believe what they say, so that they
can hide lust in a dark corner of their minds? And even
while staying within conventional bounds, many people
have to admit that their imaginary sex excursions are apt to
be alldressed up as dreams ofromance.
    Self-righteous anger also can be very enjoyable. In a
perverse waywe can actuallytake satisfaction from the fact
that many people annoy us, for it brings a comfortable feel-
ing of superiority. Gossip barbed with our anger, a polite
form of murder by character assassination, has its satisfac-
tions for us, too. Here we are not trying to help those we
criticize; we are trying to proclaimour own righteousness.
    When gluttony is less than ruinous, we have a milder
word for that, too; we call it "taking our comfort." We live
in a world riddled with envy. To a greater or less degree,
everybody is infected with it. From this defect we must
surely get a warped yet definite satisfaction. Else why
would we consume such great amounts of time wishing for
what we have not, rather than working for it, or angrily
looking for attributes we shallnever have, instead ofadjust-
ing to the fact, and accepting it? And how often we work
hard with no better motive than to be secure and slothful
later on--onlywe callthat "retiring." Consider, too, our tal-
ents for procrastination, which is really sloth in five
syllables. Nearly anyone could submit a good list of such
defects as these, and few ofus would seriouslythink ofgiv-
ing themup, at least untiltheycause us excessive misery.
    Some people, of course, may conclude that they are in-

68                       S T E P    S I X

deed ready to have all such defects taken from them. But
even these people, if they construct a list of still milder de-
fects, willbe obliged to admit that theyprefer to hang on to
some of them. Therefore, it seems plain that few of us can
quickly or easily become ready to aim at spiritual and
moralperfection; we want to settle for onlyas much perfec-
tion as will get us by in life, according, of course, to our
various and sundry ideas of what will get us by. So the dif-
ference between "the boys and the men" is the difference
between striving for a self-determined objective and for the
perfect objective which is ofGod.
    Many will at once ask, "How can we accept the entire
implication of Step Six? Why--that is perfection!" This
sounds like a hard question, but practicallyspeaking, it isn't.
Only Step One, where we made the 100 percent admission
we were powerless over alcohol, can be practiced with ab-
solute perfection. The remaining eleven Steps state perfect
ideals. They are goals toward which we look, and the mea-
suring sticks by which we estimate our progress. Seen in
this light, Step Six is still difficult, but not at all impossible.
The only urgent thing is that we make a beginning, and
keep trying.
    If we would gain any real advantage in the use of this
Step on problems other than alcohol, we shallneed to make
a brand new venture into open-mindedness. We shall need
to raise our eyes toward perfection, and be readyto walk in
that direction. It will seldom matter how haltinglywe walk.
The onlyquestion willbe "Are we ready?"
    Looking again at those defects we are still unwilling to
give up, we ought to erase the hard-and-fast lines that we

                        S T E P  S I X                    69

have drawn. Perhaps we shall be obliged in some cases still
to say, "This I cannot give up yet . . . ," but we should not
sayto ourselves, "This I will never give up!"
    Let's dispose of what appears to be a hazardous open
end we have left. It is suggested that we ought to become
entirely willing to aim toward perfection. We note that
some delay, however, might be pardoned. That word, in the
mind of a rationalizing alcoholic, could certainly be given a
longtermmeaning. He could say, "How veryeasy! Sure, I'll
head toward perfection, but I'm certainly not going to hurry
any. Maybe I can postpone dealing with some of my prob-
lems indefinitely." Of course, this won't do. Such a bluffing
ofoneselfwillhave to go the wayofmanyanother pleasant
rationalization. At the very least, we shall have to come to
grips with some of our worst character defects and take ac-
tion toward their removalas quicklyas we can.
    The moment we say, "No, never!" our minds close
against the grace of God. Delay is dangerous, and rebellion
may be fatal. This is the exact point at which we abandon
limited objectives, and move toward God's willfor us.

                      Step Seven

         "Humbly asked Him to remove our short-
         comings."

SINCE     this Step so specifically concerns itself with hu-
mility, we should pause here to consider what humility is
and what the practice ofit can mean to us.
    Indeed, the attainment of greater humilityis the founda-
tion principle of each of A.A.'s Twelve Steps. For without
some degree of humility, no alcoholic can stay sober at all.
Nearly all A.A.'s have found, too, that unless they develop
much more of this precious quality than may be required
just for sobriety, they still haven't much chance of becom-
ing truly happy. Without it, they cannot live to much useful
purpose, or, in adversity, be able to summon the faith that
can meet anyemergency.
    Humility, as a word and as an ideal, has a verybad time
of it in our world. Not only is the idea misunderstood; the
word itself is often intensely disliked. Many people haven't
even a nodding acquaintance with humilityas a wayof life.
Much ofthe everydaytalk we hear, and a great dealofwhat
we read, highlights man's pride in his own achievements.
    With great intelligence, men of science have been forc-
ing nature to disclose her secrets. The immense resources
now being harnessed promise such a quantity of material
blessings that many have come to believe that a man-made
millennium lies just ahead. Poverty will disappear, and
there will be such abundance that everybody can have all
the security and personal satisfactions he desires. The theo-

                               70

                       S T E P S E V E N                   71

ry seems to be that once everybody's primary instincts are
satisfied, there won't be much left to quarrel about. The
world will then turn happy and be free to concentrate on
culture and character. Solely by their own intelligence and
labor, men willhave shaped their own destiny.
    Certainly no alcoholic, and surely no member of A.A.,
wants to deprecate material achievement. Nor do we enter
into debate with the many who still so passionately cling to
the belief that to satisfyour basic naturaldesires is the main
object of life. But we are sure that no class of people in the
world ever made a worse mess of trying to live by this for-
mula than alcoholics. For thousands of years we have been
demanding more than our share of security, prestige, and
romance. When we seemed to be succeeding, we drank to
dream still greater dreams. When we were frustrated, even
in part, we drank for oblivion. Never was there enough of
what we thought we wanted.
    In all these strivings, so many of them well-intentioned,
our crippling handicap had been our lack of humility. We
had lacked the perspective to see that character-building
and spiritual values had to come first, and that material sat-
isfactions were not the purpose of living. Quite
characteristically, we had gone all out in confusing the ends
with the means. Instead of regarding the satisfaction of our
material desires as the means by which we could live and
function as human beings, we had taken these satisfactions
to be the finalend and aimof life.
    True, most of us thought good character was desirable,
but obviously good character was something one needed to
get on with the business of being self-satisfied. With a

72                     S T E P S E V E N

proper display of honesty and morality, we'd stand a better
chance of getting what we really wanted. But whenever we
had to choose between character and comfort, the charac-
ter-building was lost in the dust of our chase after what we
thought was happiness. Seldom did we look at character-
building as something desirable in itself, something we
would like to strive for whether our instinctual needs were
met or not. We never thought of making honesty, tolerance,
and true love ofman and God the dailybasis ofliving.
    This lack of anchorage to any permanent values, this
blindness to the true purpose of our lives, produced another
bad result. For just so long as we were convinced that we
could live exclusively by our own individual strength and
intelligence, for just that long was a working faith in a
Higher Power impossible. This was true even when we be-
lieved that God existed. We could actually have earnest
religious beliefs which remained barren because we were
still trying to play God ourselves. As long as we placed
self-reliance first, a genuine reliance upon a Higher Power
was out of the question. That basic ingredient of all humili-
ty, a desire to seek and do God's will, was missing.
    For us, the process of gaining a new perspective was
unbelievably painful. It was only by repeated humiliations
that we were forced to learn something about humility. It
was only at the end of a long road, marked by successive
defeats and humiliations, and the final crushing of our self-
sufficiency, that we began to feel humility as something
more than a condition of groveling despair. Everynewcom-
er in Alcoholics Anonymous is told, and soon realizes for
himself, that his humble admission of powerlessness over

                       S T E P  S E V E N                    73

alcohol is his first step toward liberation from its paralyzing
grip.
    So it is that we first see humility as a necessity. But this
is the barest beginning. To get completely away from our
aversion to the idea of being humble, to gain a vision of hu-
mility as the avenue to true freedom of the human spirit, to
be willing to work for humility as something to be desired
for itself, takes most of us a long, long time. A whole life-
time geared to self-centeredness cannot be set in reverse all
at once. Rebellion dogs our everystep at first.
    When we have finally admitted without reservation that
we are powerless over alcohol, we are apt to breathe a great
sigh of relief, saying, "Well, thank God that's over! I'll nev-
er have to go through that again!" Then we learn, often to
our consternation, that this is only the first milestone on the
new road we are walking. Still goaded by sheer necessity,
we reluctantly come to grips with those serious character
flaws that made problem drinkers of us in the first place,
flaws which must be dealt with to prevent a retreat into al-
coholism once again. We will want to be rid of some of
these defects, but in some instances this willappear to be an
impossible job from which we recoil. And we cling with a
passionate persistence to others which are just as disturbing
to our equilibrium, because we still enjoy them too much.
How can we possibly summon the resolution and the will-
ingness to get rid of such overwhelming compulsions and
desires?
    But again we are driven on by the inescapable conclu-
sion which we draw from A.A. experience, that we surely
must try with a will, or else fall by the wayside. At this

74                    S T E P    S E V E N

stage of our progress we are under heavy pressure and co-
ercion to do the right thing. We are obliged to choose
between the pains of trying and the certain penalties of fail-
ing to do so. These initial steps along the road are taken
grudgingly, yet we do take them. We maystillhave no very
high opinion of humility as a desirable personal virtue, but
we do recognize it as a necessaryaid to our survival.
   But when we have taken a square look at some of these
defects, have discussed them with another, and have be-
come willing to have them removed, our thinking about
humilitycommences to have a wider meaning. Bythis time
in all probability we have gained some measure of release
from our more devastating handicaps. We enjoy moments
in which there is something like real peace of mind. To
those of us who have hitherto known only excitement, de-
pression, or anxiety--in other words, to all of us--this
newfound peace is a priceless gift. Something new indeed
has been added. Where humility had formerly stood for a
forced feeding on humble pie, it now begins to mean the
nourishing ingredient which can give us serenity.
   This improved perception of humility starts another
revolutionary change in our outlook. Our eyes begin to
open to the immense values which have come straight out
of painful ego-puncturing. Until now, our lives have been
largely devoted to running from pain and problems. We
fled from them as from a plague. We never wanted to deal
with the fact of suffering. Escape via the bottle was always
our solution. Character-building through suffering might be
allright for saints, but it certainlydidn't appealto us.
   Then, in A.A., we looked and listened. Everywhere we

                     S T E P   S E V E N                  75

saw failure and misery transformed by humility into price-
less assets. We heard story after story of how humility had
brought strength out of weakness. In every case, pain had
been the price of admission into a new life. But this admis-
sion price had purchased more than we expected. It brought
a measure of humility, which we soon discovered to be a
healer of pain. We began to fear pain less, and desire humil-
itymore thanever.
    During this process oflearning more about humility, the
most profound result of all was the change in our attitude
toward God. And this was true whether we had been be-
lievers or unbelievers. We began to get over the idea that
the Higher Power was a sort of bush-league pinch hitter, to
be called upon only in an emergency. The notion that we
would still live our own lives, God helping a little now and
then, began to evaporate. Manyof us who had thought our-
selves religious awoke to the limitations of this attitude.
Refusing to place God first, we had deprived ourselves of
His help. But now the words "Of myself I am nothing, the
Father doeth the works" began to carry bright promise and
meaning.
    We saw we needn't always be bludgeoned and beaten
into humility. It could come quite as much from our volun-
taryreaching for it as it could fromunremitting suffering. A
great turning point in our lives came when we sought for
humility as something we really wanted, rather than as
something we must have. It marked the time when we
could commence to see the full implication of Step Seven:
"Humblyasked Himto remove our shortcomings."
    As we approach the actual taking of Step Seven, it

76                   S T E P  S E V E N

might be well if we A.A.'s inquire once more just what our
deeper objectives are. Each ofus would like to live at peace
with himself and with his fellows. We would like to be as-
sured that the grace of God can do for us what we cannot
do for ourselves. We have seen that character defects based
upon shortsighted or unworthydesires are the obstacles that
block our path toward these objectives. We now clearlysee
that we have been making unreasonable demands upon
ourselves, uponothers, and uponGod.
    The chiefactivator ofour defects has been self-centered
fear--primarily fear that we would lose something we al-
ready possessed or would fail to get something we
demanded. Living upon a basis of unsatisfied demands, we
were in a state of continual disturbance and frustration.
Therefore, no peace was to be had unless we could find a
means of reducing these demands. The difference between
a demand and a simple request is plain to anyone.
    The Seventh Step is where we make the change in our
attitude which permits us, with humility as our guide, to
move out from ourselves toward others and toward God.
The whole emphasis of Step Seven is on humility. It is real-
ly saying to us that we now ought to be willing to try
humility in seeking the removal of our other shortcomings
just as we did when we admitted that we were powerless
over alcohol, and came to believe that a Power greater than
ourselves could restore us to sanity. Ifthat degree ofhumili-
ty could enable us to find the grace by which such a deadly
obsession could be banished, then there must be hope ofthe
same result respecting anyother problemwe could possibly
have.

                        Step Eight

       "Made a list of all persons we had harmed,
       and became willing to make amends to them
       all."

STEPS     Eight and Nine are concerned with personal rela-
tions. First, we take a look backward and try to discover
where we have been at fault; next we make a vigorous at-
tempt to repair the damage we have done; and third, having
thus cleaned away the debris of the past, we consider how,
with our newfound knowledge of ourselves, we maydevel-
op the best possible relations with every human being we
know.
    This is a verylarge order. It is a task which we mayper-
form with increasing skill, but never really finish. Learning
how to live in the greatest peace, partnership, and brother-
hood with allmen and women, ofwhatever description, is a
moving and fascinating adventure. Every A.A. has found
that he can make little headway in this new adventure of
living until he first backtracks and really makes an accurate
and unsparing survey of the human wreckage he has left in
his wake. To a degree, he has alreadydone this when taking
moralinventory, but now the time has come when he ought
to redouble his efforts to see how many people he has hurt,
and in what ways. This reopening of emotional wounds,
some old, some perhaps forgotten, and some still painfully
festering, will at first look like a purposeless and pointless
piece of surgery. But if a willing start is made, then the

                                77

78                   S T E P  E I G H T

great advantages of doing this will so quickly reveal them-
selves that the pain will be lessened as one obstacle after
another melts away.
    These obstacles, however, are very real. The first, and
one of the most difficult, has to do with forgiveness. The
moment we ponder a twisted or broken relationship with
another person, our emotions go on the defensive. To es-
cape looking at the wrongs we have done another, we
resentfullyfocus on the wrong he has done us. This is espe-
cially true if he has, in fact, behaved badly at all.
Triumphantly we seize upon his misbehavior as the perfect
excuse for minimizing or forgetting our own.
    Right here we need to fetch ourselves up sharply. It
doesn't make much sense when a real toss pot calls a kettle
black. Let's remember that alcoholics are not the only ones
bedeviled by sick emotions. Moreover, it is usually a fact
that our behavior when drinking has aggravated the defects
ofothers. We've repeatedlystrained the patience ofour best
friends to a snapping point, and have brought out the very
worst in those who didn't think much ofus to begin with. In
many instances we are really dealing with fellow sufferers,
people whose woes we have increased. Ifwe are now about
to ask forgiveness for ourselves, why shouldn't we start out
byforgiving them, one and all?
    When listing the people we have harmed, most of us hit
another solid obstacle. We got a pretty severe shock when
we realized that we were preparing to make a face-to-face
admission of our wretched conduct to those we had hurt. It
had been embarrassing enough when in confidence we had
admitted these things to God, to ourselves, and to another

                       S T E P  E I G H T                 79

human being. But the prospect of actually visiting or even
writing the people concerned now overwhelmed us, espe-
cially when we remembered in what poor favor we stood
with most of them. There were cases, too, where we had
damaged others who were still happily unaware of being
hurt. Why, we cried, shouldn't bygones be bygones? Why
do we have to think of these people at all? These were
some ofthe ways in which fear conspired with pride to hin-
der our making a list ofall the people we had harmed.
    Some of us, though, tripped over a very different snag.
We clung to the claim that when drinking we never hurt
anybody but ourselves. Our families didn't suffer, because
we always paid the bills and seldom drank at home. Our
business associates didn't suffer, because we were usually
on the job. Our reputations hadn't suffered, because we
were certain few knew of our drinking. Those who did
would sometimes assure us that, after all, a lively bender
was onlya good man's fault. What realharm, therefore, had
we done? No more, surely, than we could easily mend with
a few casualapologies.
    This attitude, of course, is the end result of purposeful
forgetting. It is an attitude which can only be changed by a
deep and honest search ofour motives and actions.
    Though in some cases we cannot make restitution at all,
and in some cases action ought to be deferred, we should
nevertheless make an accurate and really exhaustive survey
of our past life as it has affected other people. In many in-
stances we shall find that though the harm done others has
not been great, the emotionalharmwe have done ourselves
has. Very deep, sometimes quite forgotten, damaging emo-

80                     S T E P E I G H T

tional conflicts persist below the level of consciousness. At
the time of these occurrences, theymayactuallyhave given
our emotions violent twists which have since discolored our
personalities and altered our lives for the worse.
    While the purpose of making restitution to others is
paramount, it is equallynecessarythat we extricate from an
examination of our personal relations every bit of informa-
tion about ourselves and our fundamental difficulties that
we can. Since defective relations with other human beings
have nearly always been the immediate cause of our woes,
including our alcoholism, no field of investigation could
yield more satisfying and valuable rewards than this one.
Calm, thoughtful reflection upon personal relations can
deepen our insight. We can go far beyond those things
which were superficially wrong with us, to see those flaws
which were basic, flaws which sometimes were responsible
for the whole pattern of our lives. Thoroughness, we have
found, willpay--and payhandsomely.
    We might next ask ourselves what we mean when we
say that we have "harmed" other people. What kinds of
"harm" do people do one another, anyway? To define the
word "harm" in a practical way, we might call it the result
of instincts in collision, which cause physical, mental, emo-
tional, or spiritual damage to people. If our tempers are
consistently bad, we arouse anger in others. If we lie or
cheat, we deprive others not only of their worldly goods,
but of their emotional security and peace of mind. We real-
ly issue them an invitation to become contemptuous and
vengeful. If our sex conduct is selfish, we may excite jeal-
ousy, misery, and a strong desire to retaliate in kind.

                      S T E P   E I G H T                  81

    Such gross misbehavior is not by any means a full cata-
logue of the harms we do. Let us think of some of the
subtler ones which can sometimes be quite as damaging.
Suppose that in our family lives we happen to be miserly,
irresponsible, callous, or cold. Suppose that we are irritable,
critical, impatient, and humorless. Suppose we lavish atten-
tion upon one member of the family and neglect the others.
What happens when we try to dominate the whole family,
either by a rule of iron or by a constant outpouring of
minute directions for just how their lives should be lived
from hour to hour? What happens when we wallow in de-
pression, self-pity oozing from every pore, and inflict that
upon those about us? Such a roster of harms done others--
the kind that make daily living with us as practicing alco-
holics difficult and often unbearable could be extended
almost indefinitely. When we take such personality traits as
these into shop, office, and the society of our fellows, they
can do damage almost as extensive as that we have caused
at home.
    Having carefully surveyed this whole area of human re-
lations, and having decided exactly what personality traits
in us injured and disturbed others, we can now commence
to ransack memory for the people to whom we have given
offense. To put a finger on the nearby and most deeply
damaged ones shouldn't be hard to do. Then, as year by
year we walk back through our lives as far as memory will
reach, we shall be bound to construct a long list of people
who have, to some extent or other, been affected. We
should, of course, ponder and weigh each instance careful-
ly. We shall want to hold ourselves to the course of

82                  S T E P  E I G H T

admitting the things we have done, meanwhile forgiving
the wrongs done us, real or fancied. We should avoid ex-
treme judgments, both of ourselves and of others involved.
We must not exaggerate our defects or theirs. A quiet, ob-
jective view willbe our steadfast aim.
    Whenever our pencil falters, we can fortify and cheer
ourselves by remembering what A.A. experience in this
Step has meant to others. It is the beginning of the end of
isolation fromour fellows and fromGod.

                          Step Nine

        "Made direct amends to such people wher-
        ever possible, except when to do so would
        injure them or others."

GOOD      judgment, a careful sense of timing, courage, and
prudence--these are the qualities we shall need when we
take Step Nine.
    After we have made the list of people we have harmed,
have reflected carefully upon each instance, and have tried
to possess ourselves of the right attitude in which to pro-
ceed, we will see that the making of direct amends divides
those we should approach into several classes. There will
be those who ought to be dealt with just as soon as we be-
come reasonably confident that we can maintain our
sobriety. There will be those to whom we can make only
partial restitution, lest complete disclosures do them or oth-
ers more harm than good. There will be other cases where
action ought to be deferred, and still others in which by the
very nature of the situation we shall never be able to make
direct personalcontact at all.
    Most of us begin making certain kinds of direct amends
fromthe daywe join Alcoholics Anonymous. The moment
we tell our families that we are really going to try the pro-
gram, the process has begun. In this area there are seldom
any questions of timing or caution. We want to come in the
door shouting the good news. After coming from our first
meeting, or perhaps after we have finished reading the book

                               83

84                     S T E P  N I N E

"Alcoholics Anonymous," we usually want to sit down
with some member of the family and readily admit the
damage we have done by our drinking. Almost always we
want to go further and admit other defects that have made
us hard to live with. This will be a very different occasion,
and in sharp contrast with those hangover mornings when
we alternated between reviling ourselves and blaming the
family (and everyone else) for our troubles. At this first sit-
ting, it is necessary only that we make a general admission
of our defects. It may be unwise at this stage to rehash cer-
tain harrowing episodes. Good judgment will suggest that
we ought to take our time. While we may be quite willing
to reveal the very worst, we must be sure to remember that
we cannot buy our own peace of mind at the expense of
others.
    Much the same approach will apply at the office or fac-
tory. We shall at once think of a few people who know all
about our drinking, and who have been most affected by it.
But even in these cases, we may need to use a little more
discretion than we did with the family. We maynot want to
say anything for several weeks, or longer. First we will
wish to be reasonablycertain that we are on the A.A. beam.
Then we are ready to go to these people, to tell them what
A.A. is, and what we are trying to do. Against this back-
ground we can freely admit the damage we have done and
make our apologies. We can pay, or promise to pay, what-
ever obligations, financial or otherwise, we owe. The
generous response of most people to such quiet sincerity
will often astonish us. Even our severest and most justified
critics will frequently meet us more than halfway on the

                        S T E P  N I N E                   85

first trial.
    This atmosphere of approval and praise is apt to be so
exhilarating as to put us off balance by creating an insa-
tiable appetite for more of the same. Or we may be tipped
over in the other direction when, in rare cases, we get a cool
and skeptical reception. This will tempt us to argue, or to
press our point insistently. Or maybe it will tempt us to dis-
couragement and pessimism. But if we have prepared
ourselves wellin advance, such reactions willnot deflect us
fromour steadyand even purpose.
    After taking this preliminary trial at making amends,
we may enjoy such a sense of relief that we conclude our
task is finished. We will want to rest on our laurels. The
temptation to skip the more humiliating and dreaded meet-
ings that still remain may be great. We will often
manufacture plausible excuses for dodging these issues en-
tirely. Or we may just procrastinate, telling ourselves the
time is not yet, when in reality we have already passed up
many a fine chance to right a serious wrong. Let's not talk
prudence while practicing evasion.
    As soon as we begin to feel confident in our new way
of life and have begun, by our behavior and example, to
convince those about us that we are indeed changing for the
better, it is usually safe to talk in complete frankness with
those who have been seriously affected, even those who
may be only a little or not at all aware of what we have
done to them. The only exceptions we will make will be
cases where our disclosure would cause actualharm. These
conversations can begin in a casual or natural way. But if
no such opportunity presents itself, at some point we will

86                     S T E P   N I N E

want to summon all our courage, head straight for the per-
son concerned, and lay our cards on the table. We needn't
wallow in excessive remorse before those we have harmed,
but amends at this level should always be forthright and
generous.
    There can only be one consideration which should
qualify our desire for a complete disclosure of the damage
we have done. That will arise in the occasional situation
where to make a full revelation would seriously harm the
one to whom we are making amends. Or--quite as impor-
tant--other people. We cannot, for example, unload a
detailed account of extramarital adventuring upon the
shoulders of our unsuspecting wife or husband. And even
in those cases where such a matter must be discussed, let's
try to avoid harming third parties, whoever they may be. It
does not lighten our burden when we recklessly make the
crosses ofothers heavier.
    Many a razor-edged question can arise in other depart-
ments of life where this same principle is involved.
Suppose, for instance, that we have drunk up a good chunk
ofour firm's money, whether by"borrowing" or ona heavi-
lypadded expense account. Suppose that this maycontinue
to go undetected, if we say nothing. Do we instantly con-
fess our irregularities to the firm, in the practical certainty
that we will be fired and become unemployable? Are we
going to be so rigidly righteous about making amends that
we don't care what happens to the family and home? Or do
we first consult those who are to be gravely affected? Do
we lay the matter before our sponsor or spiritual adviser,
earnestly asking God's help and guidance--meanwhile re-

                       S T E P  N I N E                   87

solving to do the right thing when it becomes clear, cost
what it may? Ofcourse, there is no pat answer which can fit
all such dilemmas. But all of them do require a complete
willingness to make amends as fast and as far as may be
possible in a given set of conditions.
    Above all, we should try to be absolutely sure that we
are not delaying because we are afraid. For the readiness to
take the full consequences of our past acts, and to take re-
sponsibility for the well-being of others at the same time, is
the veryspirit ofStep Nine.

                        Step Ten

        "Continued to take personal inventory and
        when we were wrong promptly admitted it."



AS    we work the first nine Steps, we prepare ourselves for
the adventure of a new life. But when we approach Step
Ten we commence to put our A.A. way of living to practi-
cal use, day by day, in fair weather or foul. Then comes the
acid test: can we stay sober, keep in emotional balance, and
live to good purpose under allconditions?
    A continuous look at our assets and liabilities, and a real
desire to learn and grow by this means, are necessities for
us. We alcoholics have learned this the hard way. More ex-
perienced people, of course, in all times and places have
practiced unsparing self-survey and criticism. For the wise
have always known that no one can make much of his life
until self-searching becomes a regular habit, until he is able
to admit and accept what he finds, and until he patiently
and persistentlytries to correct what is wrong.
    When a drunk has a terrific hangover because he drank
heavily yesterday, he cannot live well today. But there is
another kind of hangover which we all experience whether
we are drinking or not. That is the emotional hangover, the
direct result of yesterday's and sometimes today's excesses
of negative emotion--anger, fear, jealousy, and the like. If
we would live serenely today and tomorrow, we certainly
need to eliminate these hangovers. This doesn't mean we

                              88

                        S T E P T E N                     89

need to wander morbidly around in the past. It requires an
admission and correction of errors now. Our inventory en-
ables us to settle with the past. When this is done, we are
really able to leave it behind us. When our inventory is
carefully taken, and we have made peace with ourselves,
the conviction follows that tomorrow's challenges can be
met as theycome.
   Although all inventories are alike in principle, the time
factor does distinguish one from another. There's the spot-
check inventory, taken at any time of the day, whenever we
find ourselves getting tangled up. There's the one we take at
day's end, when we review the happenings of the hours just
past. Here we cast up a balance sheet, crediting ourselves
with things well done, and chalking up debits where due.
Then there are those occasions when alone, or in the com-
pany of our sponsor or spiritual adviser, we make a careful
review of our progress since the last time. Many A.A.'s go
in for annual or semiannual housecleanings. Many of us
also like the experience of an occasional retreat from the
outside world where we can quiet down for an undisturbed
dayor so ofself-overhauland meditation.
   Aren't these practices joy-killers as well as time-con-
sumers? Must A.A.'s spend most of their waking hours
drearily rehashing their sins of omission or commission?
Well, hardly. The emphasis on inventory is heavy only be-
cause a great many of us have never really acquired the
habit of accurate self-appraisal. Once this healthy practice
has become grooved, it will be so interesting and profitable
that the time it takes won't be missed. For these minutes
and sometimes hours spent in self-examination are bound

90                       S T E P T E N

to make all the other hours of our day better and happier.
And at length our inventories become a regular part of ev-
erydayliving, rather than something unusualor set apart.
    Before we ask what a spot-check inventoryis, let's look
at the kind of setting in which such an inventory can do its
work.
    It is a spiritual axiom that every time we are disturbed,
no matter what the cause, there is something wrong with
us. If somebody hurts us and we are sore, we are in the
wrong also. But are there no exceptions to this rule? What
about "justifiable" anger? If somebody cheats us, aren't we
entitled to be mad? Can't we be properly angry with self-
righteous folk? For us of A.A. these are dangerous excep-
tions. We have found that justified anger ought to be left to
those better qualified to handle it.
    Few people have been more victimized by resentments
than have we alcoholics. It mattered little whether our re-
sentments were justified or not. A burst of temper could
spoil a day, and a well-nursed grudge could make us miser-
ably ineffective. Nor were we ever skillful in separating
justified from unjustified anger. As we saw it, our wrath
was always justified. Anger, that occasional luxury of more
balanced people, could keep us on an emotional jag indefi-
nitely. These emotional "dry benders" often led straight to
the bottle. Other kinds of disturbances--jealousy, envy,
self-pity, or hurt pride--did the same thing.
    A spot-check inventory taken in the midst of such dis-
turbances can be of very great help in quieting stormy
emotions. Today's spot check finds its chief application to
situations which arise in each day's march. The considera-

                         S T E P   T E N                    91

tion of long-standing difficulties had better be postponed,
when possible, to times deliberately set aside for that pur-
pose. The quick inventory is aimed at our daily ups and
downs, especially those where people or new events throw
us offbalance and tempt us to make mistakes.
    In all these situations we need self-restraint, honest
analysis of what is involved, a willingness to admit when
the fault is ours, and an equal willingness to forgive when
the fault is elsewhere. We need not be discouraged when
we fall into the error of our old ways, for these disciplines
are not easy. We shalllook for progress, not for perfection.
    Our first objective will be the development of self-re-
straint. This carries a top priority rating. When we speak or
act hastily or rashly, the ability to be fair-minded and toler-
ant evaporates on the spot. One unkind tirade or one willful
snap judgment can ruin our relation with another person for
a whole day, or maybe a whole year. Nothing pays off like
restraint of tongue and pen. We must avoid quick-tempered
criticism and furious, power-driven argument. The same
goes for sulking or silent scorn. These are emotional booby
traps baited with pride and vengefulness. Our first job is to
sidestep the traps. When we are tempted by the bait, we
should train ourselves to step back and think. For we can
neither think nor act to good purpose until the habit of self-
restraint has become automatic.
    Disagreeable or unexpected problems are not the only
ones that call for self-control. We must be quite as careful
when we begin to achieve some measure ofimportance and
material success. For no people have ever loved personal
triumphs more than we have loved them; we drank of suc-

92                       S T E P T E N

cess as of a wine which could never fail to make us feel
elated. When temporarygood fortune came our way, we in-
dulged ourselves in fantasies of still greater victories over
people and circumstances. Thus blinded by prideful self-
confidence, we were apt to play the big shot. Of course,
people turned awayfromus, bored or hurt.
    Now that we're in A.A. and sober, and winning back the
esteem of our friends and business associates, we find that
we still need to exercise special vigilance. As an insurance
against "big-shot-ism" we can often check ourselves by re-
membering that we are today sober only by the grace of
God and that anysuccess we maybe having is far more His
success than ours.
    Finally, we begin to see that all people, including our-
selves, are to some extent emotionally ill as well as
frequently wrong, and then we approach true tolerance and
see what reallove for our fellows actuallymeans. It willbe-
come more and more evident as we go forward that it is
pointless to become angry, or to get hurt by people who,
like us, are suffering fromthe pains ofgrowing up.
    Such a radical change in our outlook will take time,
maybe a lot of time. Not many people can truthfully assert
that they love everybody. Most of us must admit that we
have loved but a few; that we have been quite indifferent to
the many so long as none of them gave us trouble; and as
for the remainder--well, we have really disliked or hated
them. Although these attitudes are common enough, we
A.A.'s find we need something much better in order to keep
our balance. We can't stand it if we hate deeply. The idea
that we can be possessively loving of a few, can ignore the

                       S T E P   T E N                     93

many, and can continue to fear or hate anybody, has to be
abandoned, ifonlya little at a time.
     We can try to stop making unreasonable demands upon
those we love. We can show kindness where we had shown
none. With those we dislike we can begin to practice justice
and courtesy, perhaps going out of our way to understand
and help them.
     Whenever we fail anyof these people, we can promptly
admit it--to ourselves always, and to them also, when the
admission would be helpful. Courtesy, kindness, justice,
and love are the keynotes by which we may come into har-
mony with practically anybody. When in doubt we can
always pause, saying, "Not my will, but Thine, be done."
And we can often ask ourselves, "Am I doing to others as I
would have themdo to me--today?"
     When evening comes, perhaps just before going to
sleep, many of us draw up a balance sheet for the day. This
is a good place to remember that inventory-taking is not al-
ways done in red ink. It's a poor day indeed when we
haven't done something right. As a matter of fact, the wak-
ing hours are usually well filled with things that are
constructive. Good intentions, good thoughts, and good acts
are there for us to see. Even when we have tried hard and
failed, we maychalk that up as one ofthe greatest credits of
all. Under these conditions, the pains of failure are convert-
ed into assets. Out of them we receive the stimulation we
need to go forward. Someone who knew what he was talk-
ing about once remarked that pain was the touchstone of all
spiritual progress. How heartily we A.A.'s can agree with
him, for we know that the pains of drinking had to come

94                     S T E P  T E N

before sobriety, and emotionalturmoilbefore serenity.
    As we glance down the debit side of the day's ledger,
we should carefully examine our motives in each thought
or act that appears to be wrong. In most cases our motives
won't be hard to see and understand. When prideful, angry,
jealous, anxious, or fearful, we acted accordingly, and that
was that. Here we need only recognize that we did act or
think badly, tryto visualize how we might have done better,
and resolve with God's help to carry these lessons over into
tomorrow, making, ofcourse, anyamends stillneglected.
    But in other instances only the closest scrutiny will re-
vealwhat our true motives were. There are cases where our
ancient enemy, rationalization, has stepped in and has justi-
fied conduct which was really wrong. The temptation here
is to imagine that we had good motives and reasons when
we reallydidn't.
    We "constructively criticized" someone who needed it,
when our real motive was to win a useless argument. Or,
the person concerned not being present, we thought we
were helping others to understand him, when in actuality
our true motive was to feel superior by pulling him down.
We sometimes hurt those we love because they need to be
"taught a lesson," when we really want to punish. We were
depressed and complained we felt bad, when in fact we
were mainly asking for sympathy and attention. This odd
trait of mind and emotion, this perverse wish to hide a bad
motive underneath a good one, permeates human affairs
from top to bottom. This subtle and elusive kind of self-
righteousness can underlie the smallest act or thought.
Learning daily to spot, admit, and correct these flaws is the

                       S T E P  T E N                    95

essence of character-building and good living. An honest
regret for harms done, a genuine gratitude for blessings re-
ceived, and a willingness to try for better things tomorrow
willbe the permanent assets we shallseek.
   Having so considered our day, not omitting to take due
note of things well done, and having searched our hearts
with neither fear nor favor, we can truly thank God for the
blessings we have received and sleep in good conscience.

                     Step Eleven

        "Sought through prayer and meditation to
        improve our conscious contact with God as
        we understood Him, praying only for knowl-
        edge of His will for us and the power to car-
        ry that out."



PRAYER      and meditation are our principal means of con-
scious contact withGod.
    We A.A.'s are active folk, enjoying the satisfactions of
dealing with the realities of life, usually for the first time in
our lives, and strenuously trying to help the next alcoholic
who comes along. So it isn't surprising that we often tend to
slight serious meditation and prayer as something not really
necessary. To be sure, we feel it is something that might
help us to meet an occasional emergency, but at first many
of us are apt to regard it as a somewhat mysterious skill of
clergymen, from which we may hope to get a secondhand
benefit. Or perhaps we don't believe in these things at all.
    To certain newcomers and to those one-time agnostics
who still cling to the A.A. group as their higher power,
claims for the power ofprayer may, despite allthe logic and
experience in proof of it, still be unconvincing or quite ob-
jectionable. Those of us who once felt this way can
certainly understand and sympathize. We well remember
how something deep inside us kept rebelling against the
idea ofbowing before anyGod. Manyofus had strong log-

                              96

                     S T E P  E L E V E N                   97

ic, too, which "proved" there was no God whatever. What
about allthe accidents, sickness, cruelty, and injustice in the
world? What about all those unhappy lives which were the
direct result of unfortunate birth and uncontrollable circum-
stances? Surely there could be no justice in this scheme of
things, and therefore no God at all.
    Sometimes we took a slightly different tack. Sure, we
said to ourselves, the hen probably did come before the
egg. No doubt the universe had a "first cause" ofsome sort,
the God of the Atom, maybe, hot and cold by turns. But
certainly there wasn't any evidence of a God who knew or
cared about human beings. We liked A.A. all right, and
were quick to saythat it had done miracles. But we recoiled
from meditation and prayer as obstinately as the scientist
who refused to perform a certain experiment lest it prove
his pet theory wrong. Of course we finally did experiment,
and when unexpected results followed, we felt different; in
fact we knew different; and so we were sold on meditation
and prayer. And that, we have found, can happen to any-
body who tries. It has been well said that "almost the only
scoffers at prayer are those who never tried it enough."
    Those of us who have come to make regular use of
prayer would no more do without it than we would refuse
air, food, or sunshine. And for the same reason. When we
refuse air, light, or food, the body suffers. And when we
turn away from meditation and prayer, we likewise deprive
our minds, our emotions, and our intuitions of vitally need-
ed support. As the body can fail its purpose for lack of
nourishment, so can the soul. We allneed the light of God's
reality, the nourishment ofHis strength, and the atmosphere

98                  S T E P   E L E V E N

of His grace. To an amazing extent the facts of A.A. Life
confirmthis ageless truth.
    There is a direct linkage among self-examination, medi-
tation, and prayer. Taken separately, these practices can
bring much relief and benefit. But when they are logically
related and interwoven, the result is an unshakable founda-
tion for life. Now and then we may be granted a glimpse of
that ultimate reality which is God's kingdom. And we will
be comforted and assured that our own destinyin that realm
will be secure for so long as we try, however falteringly, to
find and do the willofour own Creator.
    As we have seen, self-searching is the means by which
we bring new vision, action, and grace to bear upon the
dark and negative side of our natures. It is a step in the de-
velopment of that kind of humility that makes it possible
for us to receive God's help. Yet it is only a step. We will
want to go further.
    We willwant the good that is in us all, even in the worst
of us, to flower and to grow. Most certainly we shall need
bracing air and an abundance of food. But first of all we
shall want sunlight; nothing much can grow in the dark.
Meditation is our step out into the sun. How, then, shall we
meditate?
    The actual experience of meditation and prayer across
the centuries is, of course, immense. The world's libraries
and places of worship are a treasure trove for all seekers. It
is to be hoped that every A.A. who has a religious connec-
tion which emphasizes meditation willreturn to the practice
of that devotion as never before. But what about the rest of
us who, less fortunate, don't even know how to begin?

                     S T E P  E L E V E N                   99

    Well, we might start like this. First let's look at a really
good prayer. We won't have far to seek; the great men and
women of all religions have left us a wonderful supply.
Here let us consider one that is a classic.
    Its author was a man who for several hundred years
now has been rated as a saint. We won't be biased or scared
off by that fact, because although he was not an alcoholic
he did, like us, go through the emotionalwringer. And as he
came out the other side of that painful experience, this
prayer was his expression of what he could then see, feel,
and wishto become:
    "Lord, make me a channel of thy peace--that where
there is hatred, I may bring love--that where there is
wrong, I may bring the spirit of forgiveness--that where
there is discord, I may bring harmony--that where there is
error, I may bring truth--that where there is doubt, I may
bring faith--that where there is despair, I may bring hope
--that where there are shadows, I may bring light--that
where there is sadness, I may bring joy. Lord, grant that I
may seek rather to comfort than to be comforted--to un-
derstand, than to be understood--to love, than to be loved.
For it is by self-forgetting that one finds. It is by forgiving
that one is forgiven. It is bydying that one awakens to Eter-
nalLife. Amen."
    As beginners in meditation, we might now reread this
prayer several times very slowly, savoring every word and
trying to take in the deep meaning of each phrase and idea.
It will help if we can drop all resistance to what our friend
says. For in meditation, debate has no place. We rest quietly
with the thoughts of someone who knows, so that we may

100                   S T E P  E L E V E N

experience and learn.
     As though lying upon a sunlit beach, let us relax and
breathe deeply of the spiritual atmosphere with which the
grace of this prayer surrounds us. Let us become willing to
partake and be strengthened and lifted up bythe sheer spiri-
tual power, beauty, and love of which these magnificent
words are the carriers. Let us look now upon the sea and
ponder what its mystery is; and let us lift our eyes to the far
horizon, beyond which we shall seek all those wonders still
unseen.
     "Shucks!" says somebody. "This is nonsense. It isn't
practical."
     When such thoughts break in, we might recall, a little
ruefully, how much store we used to set by imagination as
it tried to create realityout ofbottles. Yes, we reveled inthat
sort of thinking, didn't we? And though sober nowadays,
don't we often try to do much the same thing? Perhaps our
trouble was not that we used our imagination. Perhaps the
real trouble was our almost total inability to point imagina-
tion toward the right objectives. There's nothing the matter
with constructive imagination; all sound achievement rests
upon it. After all, no man can build a house untilhe first en-
visions a plan for it. Well, meditation is like that, too; it
helps to envision our spiritual objective before we try to
move toward it. So let's get back to that sunlit beach--or to
the plains or to the mountains, ifyou prefer.
     When, by such simple devices, we have placed our-
selves in a mood in which we can focus undisturbed on
constructive imagination, we might proceed like this:
     Once more we read our prayer, and again try to see

                     S T E P   E L E V E N                101

what its inner essence is. We'll think now about the man
who first uttered the prayer. First of all, he wanted to be-
come a "channel." Then he asked for the grace to bring
love, forgiveness, harmony, truth, faith, hope, light, and joy
to everyhuman being he could.
    Next came the expression of an aspiration and a hope
for himself. He hoped, God willing, that he might be able to
find some ofthese treasures, too. This he would tryto do by
what he called self-forgetting. What did he mean by "self-
forgetting," and how did he propose to accomplish that?
    He thought it better to give comfort than to receive it;
better to understand than to be understood; better to forgive
than to be forgiven.
    This much could be a fragment of what is called medi-
tation, perhaps our very first attempt at a mood, a flier into
the realm of spirit, if you like. It ought to be followed by a
good look at where we stand now, and a further look at
what might happen in our lives were we able to move clos-
er to the idealwe have been trying to glimpse. Meditation is
something which can always be further developed. It has
no boundaries, either of width or height. Aided by such in-
struction and example as we can find, it is essentially an
individual adventure, something which each one of us
works out in his own way. But its object is always the
same: to improve our conscious contact with God, with His
grace, wisdom, and love. And let's always remember that
meditation is in reality intensely practical. One of its first
fruits is emotional balance. With it we can broaden and
deepen the channel between ourselves and God as we un-
derstand Him.

102                   S T E P E L E V E N

     Now, what of prayer? Prayer is the raising of the heart
and mind to God--and in this sense it includes meditation.
How maywe go about it? And how does it fit in with medi-
tation? Prayer, as commonly understood, is a petition to
God. Having opened our channel as best we can, we try to
ask for those right things of which we and others are in the
greatest need. And we think that the whole range of our
needs is well defined by that part of Step Eleven which
says: ". . . knowledge of His will for us and the power to
carrythat out." Arequest for this fits in anypart ofour day.
     In the morning we think of the hours to come. Perhaps
we think ofour day's work and the chances it mayafford us
to be useful and helpful, or of some special problem that it
may bring. Possibly today will see a continuation of a seri-
ous and as yet unresolved problemleft over fromyesterday.
Our immediate temptation will be to ask for specific solu-
tions to specific problems, and for the ability to help other
people as we have already thought they should be helped.
In that case, we are asking God to do it our way. Therefore,
we ought to consider each request carefully to see what its
real merit is. Even so, when making specific requests, it
will be well to add to each one of them this qualification: ".
. . if it be Thy will." We ask simply that throughout the day
God place in us the best understanding of His will that we
can have for that day, and that we be given the grace by
which we maycarryit out.
     As the daygoes on, we can pause where situations must
be met and decisions made, and renew the simple request:
"Thy will, not mine, be done." If at these points our emo-
tional disturbance happens to be great, we will more surely

                     S T E P  E L E V E N                103

keep our balance, provided we remember, and repeat to
ourselves, a particular prayer or phrase that has appealed to
us in our reading or meditation. Just saying it over and over
will often enable us to clear a channel choked up with
anger, fear, frustration, or misunderstanding, and permit us
to return to the surest help ofall--our search for God's will,
not our own, in the moment of stress. At these critical mo-
ments, if we remind ourselves that "it is better to comfort
than to be comforted, to understand than to be understood,
to love than to be loved," we will be following the intent of
Step Eleven.
     Of course, it is reasonable and understandable that the
question is often asked: "Why can't we take a specific and
troubling dilemma straight to God, and in prayer secure
fromHimsure and definite answers to our requests?"
     This can be done, but it has hazards. We have seen
A.A.'s ask with much earnestness and faith for God's ex-
plicit guidance on matters ranging all the way from a
shattering domestic or financial crisis to correcting a minor
personal fault, like tardiness. Quite often, however, the
thoughts that seem to come from God are not answers at
all. Theyprove to be well-intentioned unconscious rational-
izations. The A.A., or indeed any man, who tries to run his
life rigidly by this kind of prayer, by this self-serving de-
mand of God for replies, is a particularly disconcerting
individual. To any questioning or criticism of his actions he
instantly proffers his reliance upon prayer for guidance in
all matters great or small. He may have forgotten the possi-
bility that his own wishful thinking and the human
tendency to rationalize have distorted his so-called guid-

104                  S T E P   E L E V E N

ance. With the best of intentions, he tends to force his own
will into all sorts of situations and problems with the com-
fortable assurance that he is acting under God's specific
direction. Under such an illusion, he can of course create
great havoc without in the least intending it.
    We also fall into another similar temptation. We form
ideas as to what we think God's willis for other people. We
say to ourselves, "This one ought to be cured of his fatal
malady," or "That one ought to be relieved ofhis emotional
pain," and we pray for these specific things. Such prayers,
of course, are fundamentally good acts, but often they are
based upon a supposition that we know God's will for the
person for whom we pray. This means that side by side
with an earnest prayer there can be a certain amount of pre-
sumption and conceit in us. It is A.A.'s experience that
particularly in these cases we ought to pray that God's will,
whatever it is, be done for others as wellas for ourselves.
    In A.A. we have found that the actual good results of
prayer are beyond question. Theyare matters of knowledge
and experience. All those who have persisted have found
strength not ordinarilytheir own. Theyhave found wisdom
beyond their usual capability. And they have increasingly
found a peace of mind which can stand firm in the face of
difficult circumstances.
    We discover that we do receive guidance for our lives
to just about the extent that we stop making demands upon
God to give it to us on order and on our terms. Almost any
experienced A.A. will tell how his affairs have taken re-
markable and unexpected turns for the better as he tried to
improve his conscious contact with God. He will also re-

                     S T E P  E L E V E N                  105

port that out of every season of grief or suffering, when the
hand of God seemed heavy or even unjust, new lessons for
living were learned, new resources of courage were uncov-
ered, and that finally, inescapably, the conviction came that
God does "move in a mysterious way His wonders to per-
form."
    Allthis should be veryencouraging news for those who
recoil from prayer because they don't believe in it, or be-
cause they feel themselves cut off from God's help and
direction. All of us, without exception, pass through times
when we can pray only with the greatest exertion of will.
Occasionally we go even further than this. We are seized
with a rebellion so sickening that we simply won't pray.
When these things happen we should not think too ill of
ourselves. We should simply resume prayer as soon as we
can, doing what we know to be good for us.
    Perhaps one of the greatest rewards of meditation and
prayer is the sense of belonging that comes to us. We no
longer live in a completely hostile world. We are no longer
lost and frightened and purposeless. The moment we catch
even a glimpse of God's will, the moment we begin to see
truth, justice, and love as the real and eternal things in life,
we are no longer deeply disturbed by all the seeming evi-
dence to the contrary that surrounds us in purely human
affairs. We know that God lovingly watches over us. We
know that when we turn to Him, all will be well with us,
here and hereafter.

                      Step Twelve

        "Having had a spiritual awakening as the
        result of these steps, we tried to carry this
        message to alcoholics, and to practice these
        principles in all our affairs."

THE     joyof living is the theme of A.A.'s Twelfth Step, and
action is its key word. Here we turn outward toward our
fellow alcoholics who are still in distress. Here we experi-
ence the kind ofgiving that asks no rewards. Here we begin
to practice all Twelve Steps of the program in our daily
lives so that we and those about us may find emotional so-
briety. When the Twelfth Step is seen in its full implication,
it is really talking about the kind of love that has no price
tag on it.
    Our Twelfth Step also says that as a result of practicing
all the Steps, we have each found something called a spiri-
tual awakening. To new A.A.'s, this often seems like a very
dubious and improbable state of affairs. "What do you
mean when you talk about a 'spiritual awakening'?" they
ask.
    Maybe there are as many definitions of spiritual awak-
ening as there are people who have had them. But certainly
each genuine one has something in common with all the
others. And these things which they have in common are
not too hard to understand. When a man or a woman has a
spiritual awakening, the most important meaning of it is
that he has now become able to do, feel, and believe that

                              106

                     S T E P   T W E L V E                 107

which he could not do before on his unaided strength and
resources alone. He has been granted a gift which amounts
to a new state of consciousness and being. He has been set
on a path which tells him he is really going somewhere,
that life is not a dead end, not something to be endured or
mastered. In a very real sense he has been transformed, be-
cause he has laid hold of a source of strength which, in one
way or another, he had hitherto denied himself. He finds
himself in possession of a degree of honesty, tolerance, un-
selfishness, peace of mind, and love of which he had
thought himself quite incapable. What he has received is a
free gift, and yet usually, at least in some small part, he has
made himselfreadyto receive it.
    A.A.'s manner of making ready to receive this gift lies
in the practice of the Twelve Steps in our program. So let's
consider briefly what we have been trying to do up to this
point:
    Step One showed us an amazing paradox: We found
that we were totally unable to be rid of the alcohol obses-
sion until we first admitted that we were powerless over it.
In Step Two we saw that since we could not restore our-
selves to sanity, some Higher Power must necessarilydo so
if we were to survive. Consequently, in Step Three we
turned our will and our lives over to the care of God as we
understood Him. For the time being, we who were atheist
or agnostic discovered that our own group, or A.A. as a
whole, would suffice as a higher power. Beginning with
Step Four, we commenced to search out the things in our-
selves which had brought us to physical, moral, and
spiritual bankruptcy. We made a searching and fearless

108                  S T E P T W E L V E

moral inventory. Looking at Step Five, we decided that an
inventory, taken alone, wouldn't be enough. We knew we
would have to quit the deadly business of living alone with
our conflicts, and in honesty confide these to God and an-
other human being. At Step Six, many of us balked--for
the practical reason that we did not wish to have all our de-
fects of character removed, because we still loved some of
them too much. Yet we knew we had to make a settlement
with the fundamental principle of Step Six. So we decided
that while we still had some flaws of character that we
could not yet relinquish, we ought nevertheless to quit our
stubborn, rebellious hanging on to them. We said to our-
selves, "This I cannot do today, perhaps, but I can stop
crying out 'No, never!'" Then, in Step Seven, we humbly
asked God to remove our short comings such as He could
or would under the conditions of the day we asked. In Step
Eight, we continued our housecleaning, for we saw that we
were not only in conflict with ourselves, but also with peo-
ple and situations in the world in which we lived. We had to
begin to make our peace, and so we listed the people we
had harmed and became willing to set things right. We fol-
lowed this up in Step Nine by making direct amends to
those concerned, except when it would injure themor other
people. Bythis time, at Step Ten, we had begun to get a ba-
sis for daily living, and we keenly realized that we would
need to continue taking personal inventory, and that when
we were in the wrong we ought to admit it promptly. In
Step Eleven we saw that if a Higher Power had restored us
to sanity and had enabled us to live with some peace of
mind in a sorely troubled world, then such a Higher Power

                      S T E P   T W E L V E                 109

was worth knowing better, by as direct contact as possible.
The persistent use of meditation and prayer, we found, did
open the channel so that where there had been a trickle,
there now was a river which led to sure power and safe
guidance from God as we were increasingly better able to
understand Him.
    So, practicing these Steps, we had a spiritualawakening
about which finallythere was no question. Looking at those
who were only beginning and still doubted themselves, the
rest of us were able to see the change setting in. Fromgreat
numbers of such experiences, we could predict that the
doubter who still claimed that he hadn't got the "spiritual
angle," and who still considered his well-loved A.A. group
the higher power, would presently love God and call Him
by name.
    Now, what about the rest ofthe TwelfthStep?The won-
derful energy it releases and the eager action by which it
carries our message to the next suffering alcoholic and
which finally translates the Twelve Steps into action upon
all our affairs is the payoff, the magnificent reality, of Alco-
holicsAnonymous.
    Even the newest of newcomers finds undreamed re-
wards as he tries to help his brother alcoholic, the one who
is even blinder than he. This is indeed the kind of giving
that actually demands nothing. He does not expect his
brother sufferer to pay him, or even to love him. And then
he discovers that by the divine paradox of this kind of giv-
ing he has found his own reward, whether his brother has
yet received anything or not. His own character maystillbe
gravely defective, but he somehow knows that God has en-

110                 S T E P   T W E L V E

abled him to make a mighty beginning, and he senses that
he stands at the edge of new mysteries, joys, and experi-
ences ofwhich he had never even dreamed.
    Practically every A.A. member declares that no satis-
faction has been deeper and no joygreater than in a Twelfth
Step job well done. To watch the eyes of men and women
open with wonder as theymove fromdarkness into light, to
see their lives quickly fill with new purpose and meaning,
to see whole families reassembled, to see the alcoholic out-
cast received back into his community in full citizenship,
and above allto watch these people awaken to the presence
of a loving God in their lives--these things are the sub-
stance ofwhat we receive as we carryA.A.'s message to the
next alcoholic.
    Nor is this the onlykind of TwelfthStep work. We sit in
A.A. meetings and listen, not only to receive something
ourselves, but to give the reassurance and support which
our presence can bring. If our turn comes to speak at a
meeting, we again tryto carryA.A.'s message. Whether our
audience is one or many, it is still Twelfth Step work. There
are manyopportunities even for those ofus who feelunable
to speak at meetings or who are so situated that we cannot
do much face-to-face Twelfth Step work. We can be the
ones who take on the unspectacular but important tasks that
make good Twelfth Step work possible, perhaps arranging
for the coffee and cake after the meetings, where so many
skeptical, suspicious newcomers have found confidence
and comfort in the laughter and talk. This is Twelfth Step
work in the verybest sense ofthe word. "Freely ye have re-
ceived; freely give . . ." is the core of this part of Step

                    S T E P  T W E L V E                 111

Twelve.
    We may often pass through Twelfth Step experiences
where we will seem to be temporarily off the beam. These
willappear as big setbacks at the time, but willbe seen later
as stepping-stones to better things. For example, we may
set our hearts on getting a particular person sobered up, and
after doing all we can for months, we see him relapse. Per-
haps this will happen in a succession of cases, and we may
be deeply discouraged as to our ability to carry A.A.'s mes-
sage. Or we may encounter the reverse situation, in which
we are highly elated because we seem to have been suc-
cessful. Here the temptation is to become rather possessive
of these newcomers. Perhaps we try to give them advice
about their affairs which we aren't really competent to give
or ought not give at all. Then we are hurt and confused
when the advice is rejected, or when it is accepted and
brings still greater confusion. By a great deal of ardent
Twelfth Step work we sometimes carry the message to so
many alcoholics that they place us in a position of trust.
They make us, let us say, the group's chairman. Here again
we are presented with the temptation to overmanage things,
and sometimes this results in rebuffs and other conse-
quences which are hard to take.
    But in the longer run we clearly realize that these are
only the pains of growing up, and nothing but good can
come from them if we turn more and more to the entire
Twelve Steps for the answers.
    Now comes the biggest question yet. What about the
practice of these principles in all our affairs? Can we love
the whole pattern of living as eagerly as we do the small

112                   S T E P T W E L V E

segment of it we discover when we try to help other alco-
holics achieve sobriety? Can we bring the same spirit of
love and tolerance into our sometimes deranged family
lives that we bring to our A.A. group? Can we have the
same kind ofconfidence and faith in these people who have
been infected and sometimes crippled by our own illness
that we have in our sponsors? Can we actually carry the
A.A. spirit into our daily work? Can we meet our newly
recognized responsibilities to the world at large? And can
we bring new purpose and devotion to the religion of our
choice? Can we find a new joy of living in trying to do
something about allthese things?
     Furthermore, how shallwe come to terms with seeming
failure or success? Can we now accept and adjust to either
without despair or pride? Can we accept poverty, sickness,
loneliness, and bereavement with courage and serenity?
Can we steadfastly content ourselves with the humbler, yet
sometimes more durable, satisfactions when the brighter,
more glittering achievements are denied us?
     The A.A. answer to these questions about living is "Yes,
all of these things are possible." We know this because we
see monotony, pain, and even calamity turned to good use
by those who keep on trying to practice A.A.'s Twelve
Steps. And if these are facts of life for the many alcoholics
who have recovered in A.A., they can become the facts of
life for manymore.
     Of course all A.A.'s, even the best, fall far short of such
achievements as a consistent thing. Without necessarilytak-
ing that first drink, we often get quite far off the beam. Our
troubles sometimes begin with indifference. We are sober

                     S T E P  T W E L V E                113

and happy in our A.A. work. Things go well at home and
office. We naturally congratulate ourselves on what later
proves to be a far too easyand superficialpoint ofview. We
temporarily cease to grow because we feel satisfied that
there is no need for all of A.A.'s Twelve Steps for us. We
are doing fine on a few of them. Maybe we are doing fine
on only two of them, the First Step and that part of the
Twelfth where we "carry the message." In A.A. slang, that
blissful state is known as "two-stepping." And it can go on
for years.
    The best-intentioned of us can fall for the "two-step" il-
lusion. Sooner or later the pink cloud stage wears off and
things go disappointingly dull. We begin to think that A.A.
doesn't pay off after all. We become puzzled and discour-
aged.
    Then perhaps life, as it has a way of doing, suddenly
hands us a great big lump that we can't begin to swallow, let
alone digest. We fail to get a worked-for promotion. We
lose that good job. Maybe there are serious domestic or ro-
mantic difficulties, or perhaps that boywe thought God was
looking after becomes a militarycasualty.
    What then? Have we alcoholics in A.A. got, or can we
get, the resources to meet these calamities which come to
so many? These were problems oflife which we could nev-
er face up to. Can we now, with the help of God as we
understand Him, handle them as well and as bravely as our
nonalcoholic friends often do? Can we transform these
calamities into assets, sources of growth and comfort to
ourselves and those about us? Well, we surely have a
chance if we switch from "two-stepping" to "twelve-step-

114                 S T E P   T W E L V E

ping," if we are willing to receive that grace of God which
can sustain and strengthen us in anycatastrophe.
    Our basic troubles are the same as everyone else's, but
when an honest effort is made "to practice these principles
in all our affairs," well-grounded A.A.'s seem to have the
ability, by God's grace, to take these troubles in stride and
turn theminto demonstrations offaith. We have seen A.A.'s
suffer lingering and fatal illness with little complaint, and
often in good cheer. We have sometimes seen families bro-
ken apart by misunderstanding, tensions, or actual
infidelity, who are reunited bythe A.A. wayoflife.
    Though the earning power of most A.A.'s is relatively
high, we have some members who never seem to get on
their feet moneywise, and still others who encounter heavy
financial reverses. Ordinarily we see these situations met
with fortitude and faith.
    Like most people, we have found that we can take our
big lumps as they come. But also like others, we often dis-
cover a greater challenge in the lesser and more continuous
problems of life. Our answer is in still more spiritual devel-
opment. Only by this means can we improve our chances
for really happy and useful living. And as we grow spiritu-
ally, we find that our old attitudes toward our instincts need
to undergo drastic revisions. Our desires for emotional se-
curity and wealth, for personal prestige and power, for
romance, and for family satisfactions--all these have to be
tempered and redirected. We have learned that the satisfac-
tion of instincts cannot be the sole end and aim of our lives.
If we place instincts first, we have got the cart before the
horse; we shall be pulled backward into disillusionment.

                    S T E P   T W E L V E               115

But when we are willing to place spiritual growth first--
then and onlythen do we have a realchance.
     After we come into A.A., if we go on growing, our atti-
tudes and actions toward security--emotional security and
financial security--commence to change profoundly. Our
demand for emotional security, for our own way, had con-
stantly thrown us into unworkable relations with other
people. Though we were sometimes quite unconscious of
this, the result always had been the same. Either we had
tried to play God and dominate those about us, or we had
insisted on being overdependent upon them. Where people
had temporarily let us run their lives as though they were
still children, we had felt very happy and secure ourselves.
But when theyfinallyresisted or ran away, we were bitterly
hurt and disappointed. We blamed them, being quite unable
to see that our unreasonable demands had been the cause.
     When we had taken the opposite tack and had insisted,
like infants ourselves, that people protect and take care of
us or that the world owed us a living, then the result had
been equally unfortunate. This often caused the people we
had loved most to push us aside or perhaps desert us entire-
ly. Our disillusionment had been hard to bear. We couldn't
imagine people acting that way toward us. We had failed to
see that though adult in years we were still behaving child-
ishly, trying to turn everybody--friends, wives, husbands,
even the world itself--into protective parents. We had re-
fused to learn the very hard lesson that overdependence
upon people is unsuccessful because all people are fallible,
and even the best of them will sometimes let us down, es-
pecially when our demands for attention become

116                S T E P   T W E L V E

unreasonable.
    As we made spiritual progress, we saw through these
fallacies. It became clear that if we ever were to feel emo-
tionally secure among grown-up people, we would have to
put our lives on a give-and-take basis; we would have to
develop the sense of being in partnership or brotherhood
with all those around us. We saw that we would need to
give constantly of ourselves without demands for repay-
ment. When we persistently did this we gradually found
that people were attracted to us as never before. And even if
they failed us, we could be understanding and not too seri-
ouslyaffected.
    When we developed still more, we discovered the best
possible source of emotional stability to be God Himself.
We found that dependence upon His perfect justice, for-
giveness, and love was healthy, and that it would work
where nothing else would. If we really depended upon
God, we couldn't very well play God to our fellows nor
would we feel the urge wholly to rely on human protection
and care. These were the new attitudes that finally brought
many of us an inner strength and peace that could not be
deeply shaken by the shortcomings of others or by any
calamitynot ofour own making.
    This new outlook was, we learned, something especial-
ly necessary to us alcoholics. For alcoholism had been a
lonely business, even though we had been surrounded by
people who loved us. But when self-will had driven every-
body away and our isolation had become complete, it
caused us to play the big shot in cheap barrooms and then
fare forth alone on the street to depend upon the charity of

                    S T E P  T W E L V E                 117

passersby. We were stilltrying to find emotionalsecurityby
being dominating or dependent upon others. Even when
our fortunes had not ebbed that much and we nevertheless
found ourselves alone in the world, we still vainly tried to
be secure by some unhealthy kind of domination or depen-
dence. For those of us who were like that, A.A. had a very
special meaning. Through it we begin to learn right rela-
tions with people who understand us; we don't have to be
alone anymore.
     Most married folks in A.A. have very happy homes. To
a surprising extent, A.A. has offset the damage to family
life brought about by years of alcoholism. But just like all
other societies, we do have sex and marital problems, and
sometimes they are distressingly acute. Permanent mar-
riage breakups and separations, however, are unusual in
A.A. Our main problem is not how we are to stay married;
it is how to be more happily married by eliminating the se-
vere emotional twists that have so often stemmed from
alcoholism.
     Nearly every sound human being experiences, at some
time in life, a compelling desire to find a mate of the oppo-
site sex with whom the fullest possible union can be made
--spiritual, mental, emotional, and physical. This mighty
urge is the root of great human accomplishments, a creative
energy that deeply influences our lives. God fashioned us
that way. So our question will be this: How, by ignorance,
compulsion, and self-will, do we misuse this gift for our
own destruction? We A.A. cannot pretend to offer full an-
swers to age-old perplexities, but our own experience does
provide certain answers that work for us.

118                  S T E P    T W E L V E

    When alcoholism strikes, very unnatural situations may
develop which work against marriage partnership and com-
patible union. If the man is affected, the wife must become
the head ofthe house, often the breadwinner. As matters get
worse, the husband becomes a sick and irresponsible child
who needs to be looked after and extricated from endless
scrapes and impasses. Very gradually, and usually without
any realization of the fact, the wife is forced to become the
mother of an erring boy. And if she had a strong maternal
instinct to begin with, the situation is aggravated. Obvious-
ly not much partnership can exist under these conditions.
The wife usually goes on doing the best she knows how,
but meanwhile the alcoholic alternately loves and hates her
maternalcare. A pattern is therebyestablished that maytake
a lot of undoing later on. Nevertheless, under the influence
ofA.A.'sTwelve Steps, these situations are often set right.       *

    When the distortion has been great, however, a long pe-
riod of patient striving maybe necessary. After the husband
joins A.A., the wife may become discontented, even highly
resentful that Alcoholics Anonymous has done the very
thing that all her years of devotion had failed to do. Her
husband may become so wrapped up in A.A. and his new
friends that he is inconsiderately away from home more
than when he drank. Seeing her unhappiness, he recom-
mends A.A.'s Twelve Steps and tries to teach her how to
live. She naturally feels that for years she has made a far

  *In adapted form, the Steps are also used by Al-Anon Family
Groups. Not a part of A.A., this worldwide fellowship consists of
spouses and other relatives or friends of alcoholics (in A.A. or still
drinking). Its headquarters address is 1600 Corporate Landing
Parkway, Virgina Beach, VA 23456.

                     S T E P  T W E L V E                  119

better job of living than he has. Both of them blame each
other and ask when their marriage is ever going to be happy
again. They may even begin to suspect it had never been
anygood in the first place.
    Compatibility, of course, can be so impossiblydamaged
that a separation may be necessary. But those cases are the
unusualones. The alcoholic, realizing what his wife has en-
dured, and now fully understanding how much he himself
did to damage her and his children, nearly always takes up
his marriage responsibilities with a willingness to repair
what he can and to accept what he can't. He persistently
tries allofA.A.'s Twelve Steps in his home, often with fine
results. At this point he firmly but lovingly commences to
behave like a partner instead of like a bad boy. And above
all he is finally convinced that reckless romancing is not a
way of life for him.
    A.A. has manysingle alcoholics who wish to marryand
are in a position to do so. Some marry fellow A.A.'s. How
do they come out? On the whole these marriages are very
good ones. Their common suffering as drinkers, their com-
mon interest in A.A. and spiritual things, often enhance
such unions. It is only where "boy meets girl on A.A. cam-
pus," and love follows at first sight, that difficulties may
develop. The prospective partners need to be solid A.A.'s
and long enough acquainted to know that their compatibili-
ty at spiritual, mental, and emotional levels is a fact and not
wishful thinking. They need to be as sure as possible that
no deep-lying emotional handicap in either will be likely to
rise up under later pressures to cripple them. The considera-
tions are equally true and important for the A.A.'s who

120                 S T E P T W E L V E

marry "outside" A.A. With clear understanding and right,
grown-up attitudes, veryhappyresults do follow.
    And what can be said of many A.A. members who, for
a variety of reasons, cannot have a family life? At first
many of these feel lonely, hurt, and left out as they witness
so much domestic happiness about them. If they cannot
have this kind of happiness, can A.A. offer them satisfac-
tions of similar worth and durability? Yes--whenever they
try hard to seek them out. Surrounded by so many A.A.
friends, these so-called loners tell us they no longer feel
alone. In partnership with others--women and men--they
can devote themselves to any number of ideas, people, and
constructive projects. Free of marital responsibilities, they
can participate in enterprises which would be denied to
familymen and women. We dailysee such members render
prodigies ofservice, and receive great joys in return.
    Where the possession of money and material things
was concerned, our outlook underwent the same revolu-
tionary change. With a few exceptions, all of us had been
spendthrifts. We threw moneyabout in everydirection with
the purpose of pleasing ourselves and impressing other
people. In our drinking time, we acted as if the money sup-
ply was inexhaustible, though between binges we'd
sometimes go to the other extreme and become almost
miserly. Without realizing it we were just accumulating
funds for the next spree. Moneywas the symbolofpleasure
and self-importance. When our drinking had become much
worse, moneywas onlyan urgent requirement which could
supply us with the next drink and the temporary comfort of
oblivion it brought.

                     S T E P  T W E L V E                 121

    Upon entering A.A., these attitudes were sharply re-
versed, often going much too far in the opposite direction.
The spectacle of years of waste threw us into panic. There
simply wouldn't be time, we thought, to rebuild our shat-
tered fortunes. How could we ever take care of those awful
debts, possess a decent home, educate the kids, and set
something by for old age? Financial importance was no
longer our principal aim; we now clamored for material se-
curity. Even when we were well reestablished in our
business, these terrible fears often continued to haunt us.
This made us misers and penny pinchers all over again.
Complete financial security we must have--or else. We
forgot that most alcoholics in A.A. have an earning power
considerably above average; we forgot the immense good-
will of our brother A.A.'s who were only too eager to help
us to better jobs when we deserved them; we forgot the ac-
tual or potential financial insecurity of every human being
in the world. And, worst of all, we forgot God. In money
matters we had faith onlyin ourselves, and not too much of
that.
    This all meant, of course, that we were still far off bal-
ance. When a job still looked like a mere means of getting
money rather than an opportunity for service, when the ac-
quisition of money for financial independence looked more
important than a right dependence upon God, we were still
the victims of unreasonable fears. And these were fears
which would make a serene and useful existence, at any fi-
nancial level, quite impossible.
    But as time passed we found that with the help ofA.A.'s
Twelve Steps we could lose those fears, no matter what our

122                  S T E P  T W E L V E

materialprospects were. We could cheerfullyperformhum-
ble labor without worrying about tomorrow. If our
circumstances happened to be good, we no longer dreaded
a change for the worse, for we had learned that these trou-
bles could be turned into great values. It did not matter too
much what our material condition was, but it did matter
what our spiritual condition was. Money gradually became
our servant and not our master. It became a means of ex-
changing love and service with those about us. When, with
God's help, we calmly accepted our lot, then we found we
could live at peace with ourselves and show others who still
suffered the same fears that they could get over them, too.
We found that freedom from fear was more important than
freedomfromwant.
    Let's here take note of our improved outlook upon the
problems of personal importance, power, ambition, and
leadership. These were reefs upon which many of us came
to shipwreck during our drinking careers.
    Practicallyeveryboyin the United States dreams of be-
coming our President. He wants to be his country's number
one man. As he gets older and sees the impossibilityof this,
he can smile good-naturedly at his childhood dream. In lat-
er life he finds that real happiness is not to be found in just
trying to be a number one man, or even a first-rater in the
heartbreaking struggle for money, romance, or self-impor-
tance. He learns that he can be content as long as he plays
well whatever cards life deals him. He's still ambitious, but
not absurdly so, because he can now see and accept actual
reality. He's willing to stayright size.
    But not so with alcoholics. When A.A. was quite

                    S T E P  T W E L V E                 123

young, a number of eminent psychologists and doctors
made an exhaustive study of a good-sized group of so-
called problem drinkers. The doctors weren't trying to find
how different we were from one another; they sought to
find whatever personality traits, if any, this group of alco-
holics had in common. They finally came up with a
conclusion that shocked the A.A. members of that time.
These distinguished men had the nerve to say that most of
the alcoholics under investigation were still childish, emo-
tionallysensitive, and grandiose.
     How we alcoholics did resent that verdict! We would
not believe that our adult dreams were often truly childish.
And considering the rough deal life had given us, we felt it
perfectlynaturalthat we were sensitive. As to our grandiose
behavior, we insisted that we had been possessed of noth-
ing but a high and legitimate ambition to win the battle of
life.
     In the years since, however, most of us have come to
agree with those doctors. We have had a much keener look
at ourselves and those about us. We have seen that we were
prodded by unreasonable fears or anxieties into making a
life business of winning fame, money, and what we thought
was leadership. So false pride became the reverse side of
that ruinous coin marked "Fear." We simplyhad to be num-
ber one people to cover up our deep-lying inferiorities. In
fitful successes we boasted of greater feats to be done; in
defeat we were bitter. If we didn't have much of anyworld-
ly success we became depressed and cowed. Then people
said we were of the "inferior" type. But now we see our-
selves as chips off the same old block. At heart we had all

124                 S T E P   T W E L V E

been abnormally fearful. It mattered little whether we had
sat on the shore of life drinking ourselves into forgetfulness
or had plunged in recklesslyand willfullybeyond our depth
and ability. The result was the same--all of us had nearly
perished in a sea ofalcohol.
    But today, in well-matured A.A.'s, these distorted drives
have been restored to something like their true purpose and
direction. We no longer strive to dominate or rule those
about us in order to gain self-importance. We no longer
seek fame and honor in order to be praised. When by de-
voted service to family, friends, business, or community we
attract widespread affection and are sometimes singled out
for posts of greater responsibility and trust, we try to be
humbly grateful and exert ourselves the more in a spirit of
love and service. True leadership, we find, depends upon
able example and not upon vain displays ofpower or glory.
    Still more wonderful is the feeling that we do not have
to be specially distinguished among our fellows in order to
be useful and profoundly happy. Not many of us can be
leaders of prominence, nor do we wish to be. Service, glad-
ly rendered, obligations squarely met, troubles well
accepted or solved with God's help, the knowledge that at
home or in the world outside we are partners in a common
effort, the well-understood fact that in God's sight all hu-
man beings are important, the proof that love freely given
surely brings a full return, the certainty that we are no
longer isolated and alone in self-constructed prisons, the
suretythat we need no longer be square pegs in round holes
but can fit and belong in God's scheme of things--these are
the permanent and legitimate satisfactions of right living for

                     S T E P  T W E L V E                   125

which no amount of pomp and circumstance, no heap of
material possessions, could possibly be substitutes. True
ambition is not what we thought it was. True ambition is
the deep desire to live usefully and walk humbly under the
grace ofGod.
   These little studies ofA.A. Twelve Steps now come to a
close. We have been considering so many problems that it
may appear that A.A. consists mainly of racking dilemmas
and troubleshooting. To a certain extent, that is true. We
have been talking about problems because we are problem
people who have found a way up and out, and who wish to
share our knowledge of that way with all who can use it.
For it is only by accepting and solving our problems that
we can begin to get right with ourselves and with the world
about us, and with Him who presides over us all. Under-
standing is the key to right principles and attitudes, and
right action is the key to good living; therefore the joy of
good living is the theme ofA.A. Twelfth Step.
   With each passing dayof our lives, mayeveryone of us
sense more deeply the inner meaning of A.A.'s simple
prayer:


God grant us the serenityto accept the things we cannot change,
Courage to change the things we can,
And wisdomto know the difference.


THE TWELVE TRADITIONS


                    Tradition One

        "Our common welfare should come first;
        personal recovery depends upon A.A. uni-
        ty."

THE     unity of Alcoholics Anonymous is the most cher-
ished quality our Society has. Our lives, the lives of all to
come, depend squarely upon it. We stay whole, or A.A.
dies. Without unity, the heart of A.A. would cease to beat;
our world arteries would no longer carry the life-giving
grace of God; His gift to us would be spent aimlessly. Back
again in their caves, alcoholics would reproach us and say,
"What a great thing A.A. might have been!"
   "Does this mean," some will anxiously ask, "that in
A.A. the individual doesn't count for much? Is he to be
dominated byhis group and swallowed up in it?"
   We may certainly answer this question with a loud
"No!" We believe there isn't a fellowship on earth which
lavishes more devoted care upon its individual members;
surely there is none which more jealously guards the indi-
vidual's right to think, talk, and act as he wishes. No A.A.
can compel another to do anything; nobody can be pun-
ished or expelled. Our Twelve Steps to recovery are
suggestions; the Twelve Traditions which guarantee A.A.'s
unitycontain not a single "Don't." Theyrepeatedlysay"We
ought . . ." but never "You must!"
   To many minds all this liberty for the individual spells
sheer anarchy. Every newcomer, every friend who looks at

                               129

130                T R A D I T I O N   O N E

A.A. for the first time is greatly puzzled. They see liberty
verging on license, yet theyrecognize at once that A.A. has
an irresistible strength of purpose and action. "How," they
ask, "can such a crowd of anarchists function at all? How
can they possibly place their common welfare first? What
in Heaven's name holds themtogether?"
    Those who look closely soon have the key to this
strange paradox. The A.A. member has to conform to the
principles of recovery. His life actually depends upon obe-
dience to spiritual principles. If he deviates too far, the
penalty is sure and swift; he sickens and dies. At first he
goes along because he must, but later he discovers a wayof
life he really wants to live. Moreover, he finds he cannot
keep this priceless gift unless he gives it away. Neither he
nor anybody else can survive unless he carries the A.A.
message. The moment this Twelfth Step work forms a
group, another discovery is made--that most individuals
cannot recover unless there is a group. Realization dawns
that he is but a small part of a great whole; that no personal
sacrifice is too great for preservation of the Fellowship. He
learns that the clamor of desires and ambitions within him
must be silenced whenever these could damage the group.
It becomes plain that the group must survive or the individ-
ualwillnot.
    So at the outset, how best to live and work together as
groups became the prime question. In the world about us
we saw personalities destroying whole peoples. The strug-
gle for wealth, power, and prestige was tearing humanity
apart as never before. If strong people were stalemated in
the search for peace and harmony, what was to become of

                   T R A D I T I O N  O N E             131

our erratic band of alcoholics? As we had once struggled
and prayed for individual recovery, just so earnestly did we
commence to quest for the principles through which A.A.
itself might survive. On anvils of experience, the structure
ofour Societywas hammered out.
    Countless times, in as many cities and hamlets, we re-
enacted the story of Eddie Rickenbacker and his coura-
geous company when their plane crashed in the Pacific.
Like us, they had suddenly found themselves saved from
death, but still floating upon a perilous sea. How well they
saw that their common welfare came first. None might be-
come selfish ofwater or bread. Each needed to consider the
others, and in abiding faith they knew they must find their
real strength. And this they did find, in measure to tran-
scend all the defects of their frail craft, every test of
uncertainty, pain, fear, and despair, and even the death of
one.
    Thus has it been with A.A. By faith and by works we
have been able to build upon the lessons of an incredible
experience. They live today in the Twelve Traditions ofAl-
coholics Anonymous, which--God willing--shall sustain
us in unityfor so long as He mayneed us.

                    Tradition Two

        "For our group purpose there is but one ul-
        timate authority--a loving God as He may
        express Himself in our group conscience.
        Our leaders are but trusted servants; they
        do not govern."

WHERE        does A.A. get its direction? Who runs it? This,
too, is a puzzler for every friend and newcomer. When told
that our Societyhas no president having authorityto govern
it, no treasurer who can compel the payment of any dues,
no board of directors who can cast an erring member into
outer darkness, when indeed no A.A. can give another a di-
rective and enforce obedience, our friends gasp and
exclaim, "This simply can't be. There must be an angle
somewhere." These practical folk then read Tradition Two,
and learn that the sole authority in A.A. is a loving God as
He may express Himself in the group conscience. They du-
biously ask an experienced A.A. member if this really
works. The member, sane to all appearances, immediately
answers, "Yes! It definitely does." The friends mutter that
this looks vague, nebulous, pretty naive to them. Then they
commence to watch us with speculative eyes, pick up a
fragment ofA.A. history, and soonhave the solid facts.
    What are these facts of A.A. life which brought us to
this apparentlyimpracticalprinciple?
    JohnDoe, a good A.A., moves--let us say--to Middle-
town, U.S.A. Alone now, he reflects that he maynot be able

                              132

                  T R A D I T I O N    T W O              133

to stay sober, or even alive, unless he passes on to other al-
coholics what was so freely given him. He feels a spiritual
and ethicalcompulsion, because hundreds maybe suffering
within reach of his help. Then, too, he misses his home
group. He needs other alcoholics as much as theyneed him.
He visits preachers, doctors, editors, policemen, and bar-
tenders . . . with the result that Middletown now has a
group, and he is the founder.
    Being the founder, he is at first the boss. Who else could
be? Very soon, though, his assumed authority to run every-
thing begins to be shared with the first alcoholics he has
helped. At this moment, the benign dictator becomes the
chairman of a committee composed of his friends. These
are the growing group's hierarchy of service--self-appoint-
ed, of course, because there is no other way. In a matter of
months, A.A. booms inMiddletown.
    The founder and his friends channel spirituality to new-
comers, hire halls, make hospital arrangements, and entreat
their wives to brew gallons of coffee. Being on the human
side, the founder and his friends may bask a little in glory.
They say to one another, "Perhaps it would be a good idea
ifwe continue to keep a firmhand on A.A. in this town. Af-
ter all, we are experienced. Besides, look at all the good
we've done these drunks. They should be grateful!" True,
founders and their friends are sometimes wiser and more
humble than this. But more often at this stage theyare not.
    Growing pains now beset the group. Panhandlers pan-
handle. Lonely hearts pine. Problems descend like an
avalanche. Still more important, murmurs are heard in the
body politic, which swell into a loud cry: "Do these old-

134                T R A D I T I O N T W O

timers think they can run this group forever? Let's have an
election." The founder and his friends are hurt and de-
pressed. Theyrush fromcrisis to crisis and frommember to
member, pleading; but it's no use, the revolution is on. The
group conscience is about to take over.
    Now comes the election. If the founder and his friends
have served well, they may--to their surprise--be reinstat-
ed for a time. If, however, they have heavily resisted the
rising tide of democracy, they may be summarily beached.
In either case, the group now has a so-called rotating com-
mittee, very sharply limited in its authority. In no sense
whatever can its members govern or direct the group. They
are servants. Theirs is the sometimes thankless privilege of
doing the group's chores. Headed by the chairman, they
look after public relations and arrange meetings. Their trea-
surer, strictly accountable, takes money from the hat that is
passed, banks it, pays the rent and other bills, and makes a
regular report at business meetings. The secretary sees that
literature is on the table, looks after the phone-answering
service, answers the mail, and sends out notices of meet-
ings. Such are the simple services that enable the group to
function. The committee gives no spiritual advice, judges
no one's conduct, issues no orders. Every one of them may
be promptly eliminated at the next election if they try this.
And so they make the belated discovery that they are really
servants, not senators. These are universal experiences.
Thus throughout A.A. does the group conscience decree the
terms upon which its leaders shallserve.
    This brings us straight to the question "Does A.A. have
a real leadership?" Most emphatically the answer is "Yes,

                   T R A D I T I O N  T W O                135

notwithstanding the apparent lack of it." Let's turn again to
the deposed founder and his friends. What becomes of
them? As their grief and anxiety wear away, a subtle
change begins. Ultimately, they divide into two classes
known in A.A. slang as "elder statesmen" and "bleeding
deacons." The elder statesman is the one who sees the wis-
dom of the group's decision, who holds no resentment over
his reduced status, whose judgment, fortified by consider-
able experience, is sound, and who is willing to sit quietly
on the sidelines patiently awaiting developments. The
bleeding deacon is one who is just as surely convinced that
the group cannot get along without him, who constantly
connives for reelection to office, and who continues to be
consumed with self-pity. A few hemorrhage so badlythat--
drained of all A.A. spirit and principle--theyget drunk. At
times the A.A. landscape seems to be littered with bleeding
forms. Nearly every oldtimer in our Society has gone
through this process in some degree. Happily, most of them
survive and live to become elder statesmen. They become
the realand permanent leadership of A.A. Theirs is the qui-
et opinion, the sure knowledge and humble example that
resolve a crisis. When sorely perplexed, the group in-
evitablyturns to themfor advice. Theybecome the voice of
the group conscience; in fact, these are the true voice ofAl-
coholics Anonymous. They do not drive by mandate; they
lead by example. This is the experience which has led us to
the conclusion that our group conscience, well-advised by
its elders, will be in the long run wiser than any single lead-
er.
    When A.A. was only three years old, an event occurred

136                 T R A D I T I O N      T W O

demonstrating this principle. One of the first members of
A.A., entirely contrary to his own desires, was obliged to
conformto group opinion. Here is the storyin his words.
    "One dayI was doing a Twelfth Step job at a hospitalin
New York. The proprietor, Charlie, summoned me to his
office. 'Bill,' he said, 'I think it's a shame that you are finan-
cially so hard up. All around you these drunks are getting
well and making money. But you're giving this work full
time, and you're broke. It isn't fair.' Charlie fished in his
desk and came up with an old financial statement. Handing
it to me, he continued, 'This shows the kind of money the
hospitalused to make back in the 1920's. Thousands ofdol-
lars a month. It should be doing just as well now, and it
would--if only you'd help me. So why don't you move
your work in here? I'll give you an office, a decent drawing
account, and a very healthy slice of the profits. Three years
ago, when my head doctor, Silkworth, began to tell me of
the idea of helping drunks by spirituality, I thought it was
crackpot stuff, but I've changed my mind. Some day this
bunch of ex-drunks of yours will fill Madison Square Gar-
den, and I don't see why you should starve meanwhile.
What I propose is perfectly ethical. You can become a lay
therapist, and more successful than anybody in the busi-
ness.'
    "I was bowled over. There were a few twinges of con-
science until I saw how really ethical Charlie's proposal
was. There was nothing wrong whatever with becoming a
lay therapist. I thought of Lois coming home exhausted
fromthe department store each day, onlyto cook supper for
a houseful of drunks who weren't paying board. I thought

                  T R A D I T I O N T W O                137

of the large sum of money still owing myWallStreet credi-
tors. I thought of a few of my alcoholic friends, who were
making as much moneyas ever. Whyshouldn't I do as well
as they?
    "Although I asked Charlie for a little time to consider it,
my own mind was about made up. Racing back to Brook-
lyn on the subway, I had a seeming flash of divine
guidance. It was only a single sentence, but most convinc-
ing. In fact, it came right out of the Bible--a voice kept
saying to me, 'The laborer is worthy of his hire.' Arriving
home, I found Lois cooking as usual, while three drunks
looked hungrily on from the kitchen door. I drew her aside
and told the glorious news. She looked interested, but not as
excited as I thought she should be.
    "It was meeting night. Although none of the alcoholics
we boarded seemed to get sober, some others had. With
their wives they crowded into our downstairs parlor. At
once I burst into the story of my opportunity. Never shall I
forget their impassive faces, and the steady gaze they fo-
cused upon me. With waning enthusiasm, my tale trailed
offto the end. There was a long silence.
    "Almost timidly, one of my friends began to speak. 'We
know how hard up you are, Bill. It bothers us a lot. We've
often wondered what we might do about it. But I think I
speak for everyone here when I saythat what you now pro-
pose bothers us an awful lot more.' The speaker's voice
grew more confident. 'Don't you realize,' he went on, 'that
you can never become a professional? As generous as
Charlie has been to us, don't you see that we can't tie this
thing up with his hospital or any other? You tell us that

138               T R A D I T I O N   T W O

Charlie's proposal is ethical. Sure, it's ethical, but what
we've got won't run on ethics only; it has to be better. Sure,
Charlie's idea is good, but it isn't good enough. This is a
matter of life and death, Bill, and nothing but the very best
will do!' Challengingly, my friends looked at me as their
spokesman continued. 'Bill, haven't you often said right
here in this meeting that sometimes the good is the enemy
of the best? Well, this is a plain case of it. You can't do this
thing to us!'
    "So spoke the group conscience. The group was right
and I was wrong; the voice on the subway was not the
voice of God. Here was the true voice, welling up out of
myfriends. I listened, and--thank God--I obeyed."

                   Tradition Three

        "The only requirement for A.A. membership
        is a desire to stop drinking."

THIS     Tradition is packed with meaning. For A.A. is really
saying to every serious drinker, "You are an A.A. member
if you sayso. You can declare yourself in; nobodycan keep
you out. No matter who you are, no matter how low you've
gone, no matter how grave your emotional complications
--even your crimes--we stillcan't denyyou A.A. We don't
want to keep you out. We aren't a bit afraid you'll harm us,
never mind how twisted or violent you may be. We just
want to be sure that you get the same great chance for so-
brietythat we've had. So you're anA.A. member the minute
you declare yourself."
    To establish this principle of membership took years of
harrowing experience. In our earlytime, nothing seemed so
fragile, so easily breakable as an A.A. group. Hardly an al-
coholic we approached paid any attention; most of those
who did join us were like flickering candles in a windstorm.
Time after time, their uncertain flames blew out and could-
n't be relighted. Our unspoken, constant thought was
"Which ofus maybe the next?"
    A member gives us a vivid glimpse of those days. "At
one time," he says, "every A.A. group had many member-
ship rules. Everybody was scared witless that something or
somebody would capsize the boat and dump us all back


                              139

140               T R A D I T I O N    T H R E E

into the drink. Our Foundation office asked each group to
                                          *

send in its list of 'protective' regulations. The total list was a
mile long. If all those rules had been in effect everywhere,
nobodycould have possiblyjoined A.A. at all, so great was
the sumofour anxietyand fear.
    "We were resolved to admit nobody to A.A.. but that
hypothetical class of people we termed 'pure alcoholics.'
Except for their guzzling, and the unfortunate results there-
of, they could have no other complications. So beggars,
tramps, asylum inmates, prisoners, queers, plain crackpots,
and fallen women were definitely out. Yes sir, we'd cater
only to pure and respectable alcoholics! Any others would
surely destroy us. Besides, if we took in those odd ones,
what would decent people say about us? We built a fine-
meshfence right around A.A.
    "Maybe this sounds comical now. Maybe you think we
oldtimers were pretty intolerant. But I can tell you there
was nothing funny about the situation then. We were grim
because we felt our lives and homes were threatened, and
that was no laughing matter. Intolerant, you say? Well, we
were frightened. Naturally, we began to act like most ev-
erybody does when afraid. After all, isn't fear the true basis
ofintolerance?Yes, we were intolerant."
    How could we then guess that all those fears were to
prove groundless? How could we know that thousands of
these sometimes frightening people were to make astonish-
ing recoveries and become our greatest workers and


 *In 1954, the name of the Alcoholic Foundation, Inc., was
changed to the General Service Board of Alcoholics Anonymous,
Inc., and the Foundation office is now the General Service Office.

                  T R A D I T I O N T H R E E            141

intimate friends? Was it credible that A.A. was to have a di-
vorce rate far lower than average? Could we then foresee
that troublesome people were to become our principal
teachers of patience and tolerance? Could anythen imagine
a society which would include every conceivable kind of
character, and cut across every barrier of race, creed, poli-
tics, and language with ease?
    Why did A.A. finally drop all its membership regula-
tions? Why did we leave it to each newcomer to decide
himself whether he was an alcoholic and whether he should
join us? Whydid we dare to say, contraryto the experience
of society and government everywhere, that we would nei-
ther punish nor deprive any A.A. of membership, that we
must never compel anyone to pay anything, believe any-
thing, or conformto anything?
    The answer, now seen in Tradition Three, was simplici-
ty itself. At last experience taught us that to take away any
alcoholic's full chance was sometimes to pronounce his
death sentence, and often to condemn him to endless mis-
ery. Who dared to be judge, jury, and executioner of his
ownsick brother?
    As group after group saw these possibilities, theyfinally
abandoned allmembership regulations. One dramatic expe-
rience after another clinched this determination until it
became our universaltradition. Here are two examples:
    On the A.A. calendar it was Year Two. In that time
nothing could be seen but two struggling, nameless groups
ofalcoholics trying to hold their faces up to the light.
    A newcomer appeared at one of these groups, knocked
on the door and asked to be let in. He talked frankly with

142              T R A D I T I O N  T H R E E

that group's oldest member. He soon proved that his was a
desperate case, and that above all he wanted to get well.
"But," he asked, "will you let me join your group? Since I
am the victim of another addiction even worse stigmatized
than alcoholism, you may not want me among you. Or will
you?"
    There was the dilemma. What should the group do?
The oldest member summoned two others, and in confi-
dence laid the explosive facts in their laps. Said he, "Well,
what about it? If we turn this man away, he'll soon die. If
we allow him in, only God knows what trouble he'll brew.
What shallthe answer be--yes or no?"
    At first the elders could look onlyat the objections. "We
deal," they said, "with alcoholics only. Shouldn't we sacri-
fice this one for the sake of the many?" So went the
discussion while the newcomer's fate hung in the balance.
Then one of the three spoke in a very different voice.
"What we are really afraid of," he said, "is our reputation.
We are much more afraid of what people might say than
the trouble this strange alcoholic might bring. As we've
been talking, five short words have been running through
my mind. Something keeps repeating to me, 'What would
the Master do?'" Not another word was said. What more in-
deed could be said?
    Overjoyed, the newcomer plunged into Twelfth Step
work. Tirelessly he laid A.A.'s message before scores of
people. Since this was a veryearlygroup, those scores have
since multiplied themselves into thousands. Never did he
trouble anyone with his other difficulty. A.A. had taken its
first step inthe formationofTraditionThree.

                 T R A D I T I O N  T H R E E              143

    Not long after the man with the double stigma knocked
for admission, A.A.'s other group received into its member-
ship a salesman we shall call Ed. A power driver, this one,
and brash as any salesman could possibly be. He had at
least an idea a minute on how to improve A.A. These ideas
he sold to fellow members with the same burning enthusi-
asm with which he distributed automobile polish. But he
had one idea that wasn't so salable. Ed was an atheist. His
pet obsession was that A.A. could get along better without
its "God nonsense." He browbeat everybody, and every-
body expected that he'd soon get drunk--for at the time,
you see, A.A. was on the pious side. There must be a heavy
penalty, it was thought, for blasphemy. Distressingly
enough, Ed proceeded to staysober.
    At length the time came for him to speak in a meeting.
We shivered, for we knew what was coming. He paid a fine
tribute to the Fellowship; he told how his family had been
reunited; he extolled the virtue of honesty; he recalled the
joys of Twelfth Step work; and then he lowered the boom.
Cried Ed, "I can't stand this God stuff! It's a lot of malarkey
for weak folks. This group doesn't need it, and I won't have
it! To hellwithit!"
    A great wave of outraged resentment engulfed the
meeting, sweeping every member to a single resolve: "Out
he goes!"
    The elders led Ed aside. They said firmly, "You can't
talk like this around here. You'll have to quit it or get out."
With great sarcasmEd came back at them. "Now do tell! Is
that so?" He reached over to a bookshelf and took up a
sheaf of papers. On top of them lay the foreword to the

144             T R A D I T I O N    T H R E E

book "AlcoholicsAnonymous" then under preparation. He
read aloud, "The only requirement for A.A. membership is
a desire to stop drinking." Relentlessly, Ed went on, "When
you guys wrote that sentence, did you mean it, or didn't
you?"
    Dismayed, the elders looked at one another, for they
knew he had themcold. So Ed stayed.
    Ed not only stayed, he stayed sober--month after
month. The longer he kept dry, the louder he talked--
against God. The group was in anguish so deep that all fra-
ternal charity had vanished. "When, oh when," groaned
members to one another, "willthat guyget drunk?"
    Quite a while later, Ed got a sales job which took him
out of town. At the end of a few days, the news came in.
He'd sent a telegram for money, and everybody knew what
that meant! Then he got on the phone. In those days, we'd
go anywhere on a Twelfth Step job, no matter how un-
promising. But this time nobodystirred. "Leave him alone!
Let him try it by himself for once; maybe he'll learn a les-
son!"
    About two weeks later, Ed stole by night into an A.A.
member's house and, unknown to the family, went to bed.
Daylight found the master of the house and another friend
drinking their morning coffee. A noise was heard on the
stairs. To their consternation, Ed appeared. A quizzical
smile on his lips, he said, "Have you fellows had your
morning meditation?" They quickly sensed that he was
quite in earnest. In fragments, his storycame out.
    In a neighboring state, Ed had holed up in a cheap hotel.
After all his pleas for help had been rebuffed, these words

                T R A D I T I O N  T H R E E            145

rang in his fevered mind: "They have deserted me. I have
been deserted by my own kind. This is the end . . . nothing
is left." As he tossed on his bed, his hand brushed the bu-
reau near by, touching a book. Opening the book, he read. It
was a Gideon Bible. Ed never confided any more of what
he saw and felt in that hotel room. It was the year 1938. He
hasn't had a drink since.
    Nowadays, when oldtimers who know Ed foregather,
theyexclaim, "What ifwe had actuallysucceeded in throw-
ing Ed out for blasphemy? What would have happened to
himand allthe others he later helped?"
    So the hand of Providence early gave us a sign that any
alcoholic is a member ofour Societywhen he says so.

                    Tradition Four

        "Each group should be autonomous except
        in matters affecting other groups or A.A. as
        a whole."



AUTONOMY           is a ten-dollar word. But in relation to us,
it means very simply that every A.A. group can manage its
affairs exactly as it pleases, except when A.A. as a whole is
threatened. Comes now the same question raised in Tradi-
tion One. Isn't such libertyfoolishlydangerous?
    Over the years, every conceivable deviation from our
Twelve Steps and Traditions has been tried. That was sure
to be, since we are so largely a band of ego-driven individ-
ualists. Children of chaos, we have defiantly played with
every brand of fire, only to emerge unharmed and, we
think, wiser. These verydeviations created a vast process of
trial and error which, under the grace of God, has brought
us to where we stand today.
    When A.A.'s Traditions were first published, in 1946,
we had become sure that an A.A. group could stand almost
any amount of battering. We saw that the group, exactly
like the individual, must eventually conform to whatever
tested principles would guarantee survival. We had discov-
ered that there was perfect safety in the process of trial and
error. So confident of this had we become that the original
statement of A.A. tradition carried this significant sentence:
"Any two or three alcoholics gathered together for sobriety

                               146

                 T R A D I T I O N   F O U R             147

maycallthemselves an A.A. group provided that as a group
theyhave no other affiliation."
    This meant, of course, that we had been given the
courage to declare each A.A. group an individual entity,
strictlyreliant on its own conscience as a guide to action. In
charting this enormous expanse of freedom, we found it
necessaryto post onlytwo stormsignals: Agroup ought not
do anything which would greatly injure A.A. as a whole,
nor ought it affiliate itself with anything or anybody else.
There would be real danger should we commence to call
some groups "wet," others "dry," still others "Republican"
or "Communist," and yet others "Catholic" or "Protestant"
The A.A. group would have to stick to its course or be
hopelessly lost. Sobriety had to be its sole objective. In all
other respects there was perfect freedom of will and action.
Everygroup had the right to be wrong.
    When A.A. was still young, lots of eager groups were
forming. In a town we'll call Middleton, a real crackerjack
had started up. The townspeople were as hot as firecrackers
about it. Stargazing, the elders dreamed of innovations.
Theyfigured the town needed a great big alcoholic center, a
kind ofpilot plant A.A. groups could duplicate everywhere.
Beginning on the ground floor there would be a club; in the
second story they would sober up drunks and hand them
currency for their back debts; the third deck would house
an educational project--quite noncontroversial, of course.
In imagination the gleaming center was to go up several
stories more, but three would do for a start. This would all
take a lot of money--other people's money. Believe it or
not, wealthytownsfolk bought the idea.

148                T R A D I T I O N    F O U R

    There were, though, a few conservative dissenters
among the alcoholics. They wrote the Foundation , A.A.'s*

headquarters in New York, wanting to know about this sort
of streamlining. Theyunderstood that the elders, just to nail
things down good, were about to apply to the Foundation
for a charter. These few were disturbed and skeptical.
    Of course, there was a promoter in the deal--a super-
promoter. By his eloquence he allayed all fears, despite ad-
vice from the Foundation that it could issue no charter, and
that ventures which mixed an A.A. group with medication
and education had come to sticky ends elsewhere. Tomake
things safer, the promoter organized three corporations and
became president of them all. Freshlypainted, the new cen-
ter shone. The warmth of it all spread through the town.
Soon things began to hum. To insure foolproof, continuous
operation, sixty-one rules and regulations were adopted.
    But alas, this bright scene was not long in darkening.
Confusion replaced serenity. It was found that some drunks
yearned for education, but doubted if they were alcoholics.
The personality defects of others could be cured maybe
with a loan. Some were club-minded, but it was just a ques-
tion of taking care of the lonely heart. Sometimes the
swarming applicants would go for all three floors. Some
would start at the top and come through to the bottom, be-
coming club members; others started in the club, pitched a
binge, were hospitalized, then graduated to education on
the third floor. It was a beehive of activity, all right, but un-


  *In 1954, the name of the Alcoholic Foundation, Inc., was
changed to the General Service Board of Alcoholics Anonymous,
Inc., and the Foundation office is now the General Service Office.

                 T R A D I T I O N  F O U R              149

like a beehive, it was confusion compounded. An A.A.
group, as such, simply couldn't handle this sort of project.
All too late that was discovered. Then came the inevitable
explosion--something like that day the boiler burst in
Wombley's Clapboard Factory. A chill chokedamp of fear
and frustration fellover the group.
    When that lifted, a wonderful thing had happened. The
head promoter wrote the Foundation office. He said he
wished he'd paid some attention to A.A. experience. Then
he did something else that was to become an A.A. classic. It
all went on a little card about golf-score size. The cover
read: "Middleton Group #1. Rule #62." Once the card was
unfolded, a single pungent sentence leaped to the eye:
"Don't take yourselftoo damn seriously."
    Thus it was that under Tradition Four an A.A. group
had exercised its right to be wrong. Moreover, it had per-
formed a great service for Alcoholics Anonymous, because
it had been humblywilling to applythe lessons it learned. It
had picked itself up with a laugh and gone on to better
things. Even the chief architect, standing in the ruins of his
dream, could laugh at himself--and that is the veryacme of
humility.

                     Tradition Five

        "Each group has but one primary purpose
        --to carry the message to the alcoholic who
        still suffers."



"SHOEMAKER,            stick to thy last!"... better do one thing
supremely well than many badly. That is the central theme
ofthis Tradition. Around it our Societygathers inunity. The
very life of our Fellowship requires the preservation of this
principle.
    Alcoholics Anonymous can be likened to a group of
physicians who might find a cure for cancer, and upon
whose concerted work would depend the answer for suffer-
ers of this disease. True, each physician in such a group
might have his own specialty. Every doctor concerned
would at times wish he could devote himself to his chosen
field rather than work only with the group. But once these
men had hit upon a cure, once it became apparent that only
by their united effort could this be accomplished, then all of
them would feel bound to devote themselves solely to the
relief of cancer. In the radiance of such a miraculous dis-
covery, any doctor would set his other ambitions aside, at
whatever personalcost.
    Just as firmly bound by obligation are the members of
Alcoholics Anonymous, who have demonstrated that they
can help problem drinkers as others seldom can. The
unique ability of each A.A. to identify himself with, and

                               150

                    T R A D I T I O N  F I V E            151

bring recovery to, the newcomer in no way depends upon
his learning, eloquence, or on any special individual skills.
The only thing that matters is that he is an alcoholic who
has found a key to sobriety. These legacies of suffering and
of recovery are easily passed among alcoholics, one to the
other. This is our gift from God, and its bestowal upon oth-
ers like us is the one aim that today animates A.A.'s all
around the globe.
    There is another reason for this singleness of purpose. It
is the great paradox of A.A. that we know we can seldom
keep the precious gift of sobriety unless we give it away. If
a group of doctors possessed a cancer cure, they might be
conscience-stricken iftheyfailed their mission through self-
seeking. Yet such a failure wouldn't jeopardize their person-
al survival. For us, if we neglect those who are still sick,
there is unremitting danger to our own lives and sanity. Un-
der these compulsions of self-preservation, duty, and love,
it is not strange that our Society has concluded that it has
but one high mission--to carry the A.A. message to those
who don't know there's a wayout.
    Highlighting the wisdom of A.A.'s single purpose, a
member tells this story:
    "Restless one day, I felt I'd better do some Twelfth Step
work. Maybe I should take out some insurance against a
slip. But first I'd have to find a drunk to work on.
    "So I hopped the subway to Towns Hospital, where I
asked Dr. Silkworth if he had a prospect. 'Nothing too
promising,' the little doc said. 'There's just one chap on the
third floor who might be a possibility. But he's an awfully
tough Irishman. I never saw a man so obstinate. He shouts

152               T R A D I T I O N    F I V E

that ifhis partner would treat himbetter, and his wife would
leave him alone, he'd soon solve his alcohol problem. He's
had a bad case of D.T.'s, he's pretty foggy, and he's very
suspicious of everybody. Doesn't sound too good, does it?
But working with him may do something for you, so why
don't you have a go at it?'
    "I was soon sitting beside a big hulk ofa man. Decided-
lyunfriendly, he stared at me out ofeyes which were slits in
his red and swollen face. I had to agree with the doctor--he
certainly didn't look good. But I told him my own story. I
explained what a wonderful Fellowship we had, how well
we understood each other. I bore down hard on the hope-
lessness of the drunk's dilemma. I insisted that few drunks
could ever get well on their own steam, but that in our
groups we could do together what we could not do sepa-
rately. He interrupted to scoff at this and asserted he'd fix
his wife, his partner, and his alcoholism by himself. Sarcas-
ticallyhe asked, 'How much does your scheme cost?'
    "I was thankfulI could tellhim, 'Nothing at all.'
    "His next question: 'What are you getting out ofit?'
    "Of course, my answer was 'My own sobriety and a
mightyhappylife.'
    "Still dubious, he demanded, 'Do you really mean the
only reason you are here is to try and help me and to help
yourself?'
    "'Yes,' I said. 'That's absolutely all there is to it. There's
no angle.'
    "Then, hesitantly, I ventured to talk about the spiritual
side of our program. What a freeze that drunk gave me! I'd
no sooner got the word 'spiritual' out of my mouth than he

                     T R A D I T I O N  F I V E             153

pounced. 'Oh!' he said. 'Now I get it! You're proselytizing
for some damn religious sect or other. Where do you get
that "no angle" stuff? I belong to a great church that means
everything to me. You've got a nerve to come in here talk-
ing religion!'
    "Thank heaven I came up with the right answer for that
one. It was based foursquare on the single purpose of A.A.
'You have faith,' I said. 'Perhaps far deeper faith than mine.
No doubt you're better taught in religious matters than I. So
I can't tell you anything about religion. I don't even want to
try. I'll bet, too, that you could give me a letter-perfect defi-
nition of humility. But from what you've told me about
yourself and your problems and how you propose to lick
them, I think I know what's wrong.'
    "'Okay,' he said. 'Give me the business.'
    "'Well,' said I, 'I think you're just a conceited Irishman
who thinks he can run the whole show.'
    "This reallyrocked him. But as he calmed down, he be-
gan to listen while I tried to show him that humilitywas the
main key to sobriety. Finally, he saw that I wasn't attempt-
ing to change his religious views, that I wanted him to find
the grace in his own religion that would aid his recovery.
Fromthere on we got along fine.
    "Now," concludes the oldtimer, "suppose I'd been
obliged to talk to this man on religious grounds? Suppose
my answer had to be that A.A. needed a lot of money; that
A.A. went in for education, hospitals, and rehabilitation?
Suppose I'd suggested that I'd take a hand in his domestic
and business affairs? Where would we have wound up? No
place, ofcourse."

154               T R A D I T I O N  F I V E

   Years later, this tough Irish customer liked to say, "My
sponsor sold me one idea, and that was sobriety. At the
time, I couldn't have bought anything else."

                      Tradition Six

         "An A.A. group ought never endorse, fi-
         nance or lend the A.A. name to any related
         facility or outside enterprise, lest problems
         of money, property and prestige divert us
         from our primary purpose."

THE      moment we saw that we had an answer for alco-
holism, it was reasonable (or so it seemed at the time) for us
to feel that we might have the answer to a lot of other
things. The A.A. groups, manythought, could go into busi-
ness, might finance any enterprise whatever in the total
field of alcoholism. In fact, we felt duty-bound to throw the
whole weight of the A.A. name behind any meritorious
cause.
     Here are some ofthe things we dreamed. Hospitals did-
n't like alcoholics, so we thought we'd build a hospitalchain
of our own. People needed to be told what alcoholism was,
so we'd educate the public, even rewrite schooland medical
textbooks. We'd gather up derelicts fromskid rows, sort out
those who could get well, and make it possible for the rest
to earn their livelihood in a kind of quarantined confine-
ment. Maybe these places would make large sums of
money to carry on our other good works. We seriously
thought of rewriting the laws of the land, and having it de-
clared that alcoholics are sick people. No more would they
be jailed; judges would parole them in our custody. We'd
spillA.A. into the dark regions ofdope addiction and crimi-

                              155

156                T R A D I T I O N S I X

nality. We'd form groups of depressive and paranoid folks;
the deeper the neurosis, the better we'd like it. It stood to
reason that if alcoholism could be licked, so could any
problem.
    It occurred to us that we could take what we had into
the factories and cause laborers and capitalists to love each
other. Our uncompromising honesty might soon clean up
politics. With one arm around the shoulder of religion and
the other around the shoulder of medicine, we'd resolve
their differences. Having learned to live so happily, we'd
show everybodyelse how. Why, we thought, our Societyof
Alcoholics Anonymous might prove to be the spearhead of
a new spiritualadvance! We might transformthe world.
    Yes, we of A.A. did dream those dreams. How natural
that was, since most alcoholics are bankrupt idealists. Near-
ly every one of us had wished to do great good, perform
great deeds, and embodygreat ideals. We are allperfection-
ists who, failing perfection, have gone to the other extreme
and settled for the bottle and the blackout. Providence,
through A.A., had brought us within reach of our highest
expectations. So why shouldn't we share our way of life
with everyone?
    Whereupon we tried A.A. hospitals--they all bogged
down because you cannot put an A.A. group into business;
too manybusybodycooks spoil the broth. A.A. groups had
their fling at education, and when they began to publicly
whoop up the merits of this or that brand, people became
confused. Did A.A. fix drunks or was it an educational
project? Was A.A. spiritual or was it medical? Was it a re-
form movement? In consternation, we saw ourselves

                   T R A D I T I O N   S I X             157

getting married to all kinds of enterprises, some good and
some not so good. Watching alcoholics committed willy-
nillyto prisons or asylums, we began to cry, "There oughtta
be a law!" A.A.'s commenced to thump tables in legislative
committee rooms and agitated for legal reform. That made
good newspaper copy, but little else. We saw we'd soon be
mired in politics. Even inside A.A. we found it imperative
to remove the A.A. name from clubs and Twelfth Step
houses.
    These adventures implanted a deep-rooted conviction
that in no circumstances could we endorse any related en-
terprise, no matter how good. We of Alcoholics
Anonymous could not be all things to all men, nor should
we try.
    Years ago this principle of"no endorsement" was put to
a vitaltest. Some of the great distilling companies proposed
to go into the field of alcoholeducation. It would be a good
thing, they believed, for the liquor trade to show a sense of
public responsibility. They wanted to say that liquor should
be enjoyed, not misused; hard drinkers ought to slow down,
and problemdrinkers--alcoholics--should not drink at all.
    In one of their trade associations, the question arose of
just how this campaign should be handled. Of course, they
would use the resources of radio, press, and films to make
their point. But what kind of person should head the job?
They immediately thought of Alcoholics Anonymous. If
they could find a good public relations man in our ranks,
why wouldn't he be ideal? He'd certainly know the prob-
lem. His connection with A.A. would be valuable, because
the Fellowship stood high in public favor and hadn't an en-

158                T R A D I T I O N    S I X

emyin the world.
    Soon they'd spotted their man, an A.A. with the neces-
sary experience. Straightway he appeared at New York's
A.A. headquarters, asking, "Is there anything in our tradi-
tion that suggests I shouldn't take a job like this one? The
kind of education seems good to me, and is not too contro-
versial. Do you headquarters folks see anybugs in it?"
    At first glance, it did look like a good thing. Then doubt
crept in. The association wanted to use our member's full
name in all its advertising; he was to be described both as
its director of publicity and as a member of Alcoholics
Anonymous. Of course, there couldn't be the slightest ob-
jection if such an association hired an A.A. member solely
because of his public relations ability and his knowledge of
alcoholism. But that wasn't the whole story, for in this case
not only was an A.A. member to break his anonymity at a
public level, he was to link the name Alcoholics Anony-
mous to this particular educational project in the minds of
millions. It would be bound to appear that A.A. was now
backing education--liquor trade association style.
    The minute we saw this compromising fact for what it
was, we asked the prospective publicitydirector how he felt
about it. "Great guns!" he said. "Of course I can't take the
job. The ink wouldn't be dry on the first ad before an awful
shriek would go up from the dry camp. They'd be out with
lanterns looking for an honest A.A. to plump for their
brand of education. A.A. would land exactly in the middle
of the wet-dry controversy. Half the people in this country
would think we'd signed up with the drys, the other half
would think we'd joined the wets. What a mess!"

                    T R A D I T I O N S I X               159

   "Nevertheless," we pointed out, "you still have a legal
right to take this job."
   "I know that," he said. "But this is no time for legalities.
Alcoholics Anonymous saved my life, and it comes first. I
certainly won't be the guy to land A.A. in big-time trouble,
and this would reallydo it!"
   Concerning endorsements, our friend had said it all. We
saw as never before that we could not lend the A.A. name
to anycause other than our own.

                  Tradition Seven

        "Every A.A. group ought to be fully self-
        supporting,    declining     outside  contribu-
        tions."



SELF-SUPPORTING             alcoholics? Who ever heard of
such a thing? Yet we find that's what we have to be. This
principle is telling evidence of the profound change that
A.A. has wrought in all of us. Everybodyknows that active
alcoholics scream that they have no troubles money can't
cure. Always, we've had our hands out. Time out of mind
we've been dependent upon somebody, usually money-
wise. When a society composed entirely of alcoholics says
it's going to payits bills, that's reallynews.
     Probably no A.A. Tradition had the labor pains this one
did. In earlytimes, we were allbroke. When you add to this
the habitual supposition that people ought to give money to
alcoholics trying to staysober, it can be understood whywe
thought we deserved a pile of folding money. What great
things A.A. would be able to do with it! But oddly enough,
people who had money thought otherwise. They figured
that it was high time we now--sober--paid our own way.
So our Fellowship stayed poor because it had to.
     There was another reason for our collective poverty. It
was soon apparent that while alcoholics would spend lav-
ishly on Twelfth Step cases, they had a terrific aversion to
dropping moneyinto a meeting-place hat for group purpos-

                               160

                 T R A D I T I O N S E V E N            161

es. We were astounded to find that we were as tight as the
bark on a tree. So A.A., the movement, started and stayed
broke, while its individualmembers waxed prosperous.
    Alcoholics are certainly all-or-nothing people. Our re-
actions to money prove this. As A.A. emerged from its
infancy into adolescence, we swung from the idea that we
needed vast sums of money to the notion that A.A. should-
n't have any. On every lip were the words "You can't mix
A.A. and money. We shall have to separate the spiritual
from the material." We took this violent new tack because
here and there members had tried to make money out of
their A.A. connections, and we feared we'd be exploited.
Now and then, gratefulbenefactors had endowed clubhous-
es, and as a result there was sometimes outside interference
in our affairs. We had been presented with a hospital, and
almost immediately the donor's son became its principal
patient and would-be manager. One A.A. group was given
five thousand dollars to do with what it would. The hassle
over that chunk of money played havoc for years. Fright-
ened bythese complications, some groups refused to have a
cent in their treasuries.
    Despite these misgivings, we had to recognize the fact
that A.A. had to function. Meeting places cost something.
To save whole areas from turmoil, small offices had to be
set up, telephones installed, and a few full-time secretaries
hired. Over manyprotests, these things were accomplished.
We saw that if they weren't, the man coming in the door
couldn't get a break. These simple services would require
small sums of money which we could and would pay our-
selves. At last the pendulum stopped swinging and pointed

162              T R A D I T I O N     S E V E N

straight at TraditionSevenas it reads today.
     In this connection, Bill likes to tell the following point-
ed story. He explains that when Jack Alexander's Saturday
Evening Post piece broke in 1941, thousands of frantic let-
ters from distraught alcoholics and their families hit the
Foundation letterbox in New York. "Our office staff," Bill
             *

says, "consisted of two people: one devoted secretary and
myself. How could this landslide of appeals be met? We'd
have to have some more full-time help, that was sure. So
we asked the A.A. groups for voluntary contributions.
Would they send us a dollar a member a year? Otherwise
this heartbreaking mailwould have to go unanswered.
     "To my surprise, the response of the groups was slow. I
got mighty sore about it. Looking at this avalanche of mail
one morning at the office, I paced up and down ranting
how irresponsible and tightwad my fellow members were.
Just then an old acquaintance stuck a tousled and aching
head in the door. He was our prize slippee. I could see he
had an awful hangover. Remembering some of my own,
my heart filled with pity. I motioned him to my inside cubi-
cle and produced a five-dollar bill. As my total income was
thirty dollars a week at the time, this was a fairly large do-
nation. Lois really needed the money for groceries, but that
didn't stop me. The intense relief on my friend's face
warmed my heart. I felt especially virtuous as I thought of
all the ex-drunks who wouldn't even send the Foundation a
dollar apiece, and here I was gladlymaking a five-dollar in-


 *In 1954, the name of the Alcoholic Foundation, Inc., was
changed to the General Service Board of Alcoholics Anonymous,
Inc., and the Foundation office is now the General Service Office.

                 T R A D I T I O N   S E V E N              163

vestment to fix a hangover.
    "The meeting that night was at New York's old 24th
Street Clubhouse. During the intermission, the treasurer
gave a timid talk on how broke the club was. (That was in
the period when you couldn't mix moneyand A.A. ) But fi-
nally he said it--the landlord would put us out if we didn't
pay up. He concluded his remarks by saying, 'Now boys,
please go heavier on the hat tonight, willyou?'
    "I heard all this quite plainly, as I was piously trying to
convert a newcomer who sat next to me. The hat came in
my direction, and 1 reached into my pocket. Still working
on my prospect, I fumbled and came up with a fifty-cent
piece. Somehow it looked like a very big coin. Hastily, I
dropped it back and fished out a dime, which clinked thinly
as I dropped it in the hat. Hats never got folding money in
those days.
    "Then I woke up. I who had boasted mygenerositythat
morning was treating my own club worse than the distant
alcoholics who had forgotten to send the Foundation their
dollars. I realized that my five-dollar gift to the slippee was
an ego-feeding proposition, bad for him and bad for me.
There was a place in A.A. where spirituality and money
would mix, and that was in the hat!"
    There is another story about money. One night in 1948,
the trustees of the Foundation were having their quarterly
meeting. The agenda discussion included a very important
question. A certain lady had died. When her will was read,
it was discovered she had left Alcoholics Anonymous in
trust with the Alcoholic Foundation a sum of ten thousand
dollars. The questionwas: Should A.A. take the gift?

164                T R A D I T I O N    S E V E N

     What a debate we had on that one! The Foundation was
really hard up just then; the groups weren't sending in
enough for the support of the office; we had been tossing in
all the book income and even that hadn't been enough. The
reserve was melting like snow in springtime. We needed
that ten thousand dollars. "Maybe," some said, "the groups
willnever fullysupport the office. We can't let it shut down;
it's far too vital. Yes, let's take the money. Let's take allsuch
donations inthe future. We're going to need them."
     Then came the opposition. They pointed out that the
Foundation board already knew of a total of half a million
dollars set aside for A.A. in the wills of people still alive.
Heaven only knew how much there was we hadn't heard
about. If outside donations weren't declined, absolutely cut
off, then the Foundation would one day become rich.
Moreover, at the slightest intimation to the general public
from our trustees that we needed money, we could become
immensely rich. Compared to this prospect, the ten thou-
sand dollars under consideration wasn't much, but like the
alcoholic's first drink it would, if taken, inevitably set up a
disastrous chain reaction. Where would that land us? Who-
ever pays the piper is apt to call the tune, and if the A.A.
Foundation obtained money from outside sources, its
trustees might be tempted to run things without reference to
the wishes of A.A. as a whole. Relieved of responsibility,
every alcoholic would shrug and say, "Oh, the Foundation
is wealthy--why should 1 bother?" The pressure of that fat
treasury would surely tempt the board to invent all kinds of
schemes to do good with such funds, and so divert A.A.
from its primary purpose. The moment that happened, our

                 T R A D I T I O N  S E V E N            165

Fellowship's confidence would be shaken. The board
would be isolated, and would fall under heavy attack of
criticism from both A..A. and the public. These were the
possibilities, pro and con.
    Then our trustees wrote a bright page of A.A. history.
They declared for the principle that A.A. must always stay
poor. Bare running expenses plus a prudent reserve would
henceforth be the Foundation's financial policy. Difficult as
it was, theyofficiallydeclined that ten thousand dollars, and
adopted a formal, airtight resolution that all such future
gifts would be similarly declined. At that moment, we be-
lieve, the principle of corporate poverty was firmly and
finallyembedded in A.A. tradition.
    When these facts were printed, there was a profound re-
action. To people familiar with endless drives for charitable
funds, A.A. presented a strange and refreshing spectacle.
Approving editorials here and abroad generated a wave of
confidence in the integrityofAlcoholics Anonymous. They
pointed out that the irresponsible had become responsible,
and that by making financial independence part of its tradi-
tion, Alcoholics Anonymous had revived an ideal that its
era had almost forgotten.

                   Tradition Eight

       "Alcoholics Anonymous should remain for-
       ever nonprofessional, but our service cen-
       ters may employ special workers."

ALCOHOLICS         ANONYMOUS will never have a pro-
fessional class. We have gained some understanding of the
ancient words "Freely ye have received, freely give." We
have discovered that at the point of professionalism, money
and spirituality do not mix. Almost no recovery from alco-
holism has ever been brought about by the world's best
professionals, whether medical or religious. We do not de-
cry professionalism in other fields, but we accept the sober
fact that it does not work for us. Every time we have tried
to professionalize our Twelfth Step, the result has been ex-
actlythe same: Our single purpose has been defeated.
   Alcoholics simply will not listen to a paid twelfth-step-
per. Almost from the beginning, we have been positive that
face-to-face work with the alcoholic who suffers could be
based only on the desire to help and be helped. When an
A.A. talks for money, whether at a meeting or to a single
newcomer, it can have a very bad effect on him, too. The
money motive compromises him and everything he says
and does for his prospect. This has always been so obvious
that only a very few A.A.'s have ever worked the Twelfth
Step for a fee.
   Despite this certainty, it is nevertheless true that few
subjects have been the cause of more contention within our

                             166

                T R A D I T I O N  E I G H T              167

Fellowship than professionalism. Caretakers who swept
floors, cooks who fried hamburgers, secretaries in offices,
authors writing books--all these we have seen hotly as-
sailed because they were, as their critics angrily remarked,
"making money out of A.A." Ignoring the fact that these
labors were not Twelfth Step jobs at all, the critics attacked
as A.A. professionals these workers ofours who were often
doing thankless tasks that no one else could or would do.
Even greater furors were provoked when A.A. members
began to run rest homes and farms for alcoholics, when
some hired out to corporations as personnel men in charge
of the alcoholic problem in industry, when some became
nurses on alcoholic wards, when others entered the field of
alcohol education. In all these instances, and more, it was
claimed that A.A. knowledge and experience were being
sold for money, hence these people, too, were profession-
als.
    At last, however, a plain line of cleavage could be seen
between professionalism and nonprofessionalism. When
we had agreed that the Twelfth Step couldn't be sold for
money, we had been wise. But when we had declared that
our Fellowship couldn't hire service workers nor could any
A.A. member carry our knowledge into other fields, we
were taking the counsel of fear, fear which today has been
largelydispelled in the light ofexperience.
    Take the case of the club janitor and cook. If a club is
going to function, it has to be habitable and hospitable. We
tried volunteers, who were quickly disenchanted with
sweeping floors and brewing coffee seven days a week.
They just didn't show up. Even more important, an empty

168              T R A D I T I O N     E I G H T

club couldn't answer its telephone, but it was an open invi-
tation to a drunk on a binge who possessed a spare key. So
somebody had to look after the place full time. If we hired
an alcoholic, he'd receive only what we'd have to pay a
nonalcoholic for the same job. The job was not to do
Twelfth Step work; it was to make Twelfth Step work pos-
sible. It was a service proposition, pure and simple.
    Neither could A.A. itself function without full-time
workers. At the Foundation and intergroup offices, we
                                 *

couldn't employ nonalcoholics as secretaries; we had to
have people who knew the A.A. pitch. But the minute we
hired them, the ultraconservative and fearful ones shrilled,
"Professionalism!" At one period, the status of these faith-
ful servants was almost unbearable. They weren't asked to
speak at A.A. meetings because they were "making money
out of A.A." At times, they were actually shunned by fel-
low members. Even the charitably disposed described them
as "a necessary evil." Committees took full advantage of
this attitude to depress their salaries. They could regain
some measure of virtue, it was thought, if they worked for
A.A. realcheap. These notions persisted for years. Then we
saw that if a hardworking secretary answered the phone
dozens of times a day, listened to twenty wailing wives, ar-
ranged hospitalization and got sponsorship for ten
newcomers, and was gently diplomatic with the irate drunk
who complained about the job she was doing and how she
was overpaid, then such a person could surely not be called


 *In 1954, the name of the Alcoholic Foundation, Inc., was
changed to the General Service Board of Alcoholics Anonymous,
Inc., and the Foundation office is now the General Service Office.

                    T R A D I T I O N E I G H T              169

a professional A.A. She was not professionalizing the
Twelfth Step; she was just making it possible. She was
helping to give the man coming in the door the break he
ought to have. Volunteer committeemen and assistants
could be of great help, but they could not be expected to
carrythis load dayin and dayout.
    At the Foundation, the same story repeats itself. Eight
tons of books and literature per month do not package and
channel themselves all over the world. Sacks of letters on
every conceivable A.A. problem ranging from a lonely-
heart Eskimo to the growing pains of thousands of groups
must be answered by people who know. Right contacts
with the world outside have to be maintained. A.A.'s life-
lines have to be tended. So we hire A.A. staffmembers. We
pay them well, and they earn what they get. They are pro-
fessionalsecretaries, but they certainly are not professional
                        *

A.A.'s.
    Perhaps the fear will always lurk in every A.A. heart
that one day our name will be exploited by somebody for
real cash. Even the suggestion of such a thing never fails to
whip up a hurricane, and we have discovered that hurri-
canes have a way of mauling with equal severity both the
just and the unjust. Theyare always unreasonable.
    No individuals have been more buffeted by such emo-
tional gusts than those A.A.'s bold enough to accept
employment with outside agencies dealing with the alcohol


  *The work of present-day staff members has no counterpart
among the job categories of commercial organizations. These
A.A.'s bring a wide range of business and professional experience
to their service at G.S.O.

170             T R A D I T I O N    E I G H T

problem. A university wanted an A.A. member to educate
the public on alcoholism. A corporation wanted a personnel
man familiar with the subject. A state drunk farm wanted a
manager who could really handle inebriates. A city wanted
an experienced socialworker who understood what alcohol
could do to a family. A state alcohol commission wanted a
paid researcher. These are only a few of the jobs which
A.A. members as individuals have been asked to fill. Now
and then, A.A. members have bought farms or rest homes
where badly beat-up topers could find needed care. The
question was--and sometimes still is--are such activities
to be branded as professionalismunder A.A. tradition?
    We think the answer is "No. Members who select such
full-time careers do not professionalize A.A.'s Twelfth
Step." The road to this conclusion was long and rocky. At
first, we couldn't see the realissue involved. In former days,
the moment an A.A. hired out to such enterprises, he was
immediately tempted to use the name Alcoholics Anony-
mous for publicity or money-raising purposes. Drunk
farms, educationalventures, state legislatures, and commis-
sions advertised the fact that A.A. members served them.
Unthinkingly, A.A.'s so employed recklessly broke
anonymityto thump the tub for their pet enterprise. For this
reason, some verygood causes and allconnected with them
suffered unjust criticismfromA.A. groups. More often than
not, these onslaughts were spearheaded by the cry "Profes-
sionalism! That guyis making moneyout of A.A.!" Yet not
a single one of them had been hired to do A.A.'s Twelfth
Step work. The violation in these instances was not profes-
sionalism at all; it was breaking anonymity. A.A.'s sole

                  T R A D I T I O N E I G H T             171

purpose was being compromised, and the name of Alco-
holics Anonymous was being misused.
    It is significant, now that almost no A.A. in our Fellow-
ship breaks anonymity at the public level, that nearly all
these fears have subsided. We see that we have no right or
need to discourage A.A.'s who wish to work as individuals
in these wider fields. It would be actually antisocial were
we to forbid them. We cannot declare A.A. such a closed
corporation that we keep our knowledge and experience top
secret. If an A.A. member acting as a citizen can become a
better researcher, educator, personnelofficer, then whynot?
Everybody gains and we have lost nothing. True, some of
the projects to which A.A.'s have attached themselves have
been ill-conceived, but that makes not the slightest differ-
ence with the principle involved.
    This is the exciting welter of events which has finally
cast up A.A.'s Traditionofnonprofessionalism. Our Twelfth
Step is never to be paid for. but those who labor in service
for us are worthyoftheir hire.

                   Tradition Nine

       "A.A., as such, ought never be organized;
       but we may create service boards or com-
       mittees directly responsible to those they
       serve."

WHEN       Tradition Nine was first written, it said that "Al-
coholics Anonymous needs the least possible organization."
In years since then, we have changed our minds about that.
Today, we are able to say with assurance that Alcoholics
Anonymous--A.A. as a whole--should never be orga-
nized at all. Then, in seeming contradiction, we proceed to
create special service boards and committees which in
themselves are organized. How, then, can we have an unor-
ganized movement which can and does create a service
organization for itself? Scanning this puzzler, people say,
"What do theymean, no organization?"
   Well, let's see. Did anyone ever hear of a nation, a
church, a political party, even a benevolent association that
had no membership rules? Did anyone ever hear of a soci-
ety which couldn't somehow discipline its members and
enforce obedience to necessary rules and regulations?
Doesn't nearly every society on earth give authority to
some ofits members to impose obedience upon the rest and
to punish or expel offenders? Therefore, every nation, in
fact everyformof society, has to be a government adminis-
tered by human beings. Power to direct or govern is the
essence oforganization everywhere.

                             172

                   T R A D I T I O N    N I N E               173

    Yet Alcoholics Anonymous is an exception. It does not
conformto this pattern. Neither its GeneralService Confer-
ence, its Foundation Board, nor the humblest group
                                   *

committee can issue a single directive to an A.A. member
and make it stick, let alone mete out anypunishment. We've
tried it lots of times, but utter failure is always the result.
Groups have tried to expel members, but the banished have
come back to sit in the meeting place, saying, "This is life
for us; you can't keep us out." Committees have instructed
manyan A.A. to stop working on a chronic backslider, only
to be told: "How I do my Twelfth Step work is my busi-
ness. Who are you to judge?" This doesn't mean an A.A.
won't take advice or suggestions from more experienced
members, but he surely won't take orders. Who is more un-
popular than the oldtime A.A., full of wisdom, who moves
to another area and tries to tell the group there how to run
its business? He and all like him who "view with alarm for
the good of A.A." meet the most stubborn resistance or,
worse still, laughter.
    You might think A.A.'s headquarters in New York
would be an exception. Surely, the people there would have
to have some authority. But long ago, trustees and staff
members alike found they could do no more than make
suggestions, and very mild ones at that. They even had to
coin a couple of sentences which still go into half the letters
they write: "Of course, you are at perfect liberty to handle
this matter anywayyou please. But the majorityexperience


  *In 1954, the name of the Alcoholic Foundation, Inc., was
changed to the General Service Board of Alcoholics Anonymous,
Inc., and the Foundation office is now the General Service Office.

174               T R A D I T I O N  N I N E

in A.A. does seem to suggest . . ." Now, that attitude is far
removed from central government, isn't it? We recognize
that alcoholics can't be dictated to--individually or collec-
tively.
    At this juncture, we can hear a churchman exclaim,
"They are making disobedience a virtue!" He is joined by a
psychiatrist who says, "Defiant brats! They won't grow up
and conformto socialusage!" The man in the street says, "I
don't understand it. They must be nuts!" But all these ob-
servers have overlooked something unique in Alcoholics
Anonymous. Unless each A.A. member follows to the best
of his abilityour suggested Twelve Steps to recovery, he al-
most certainly signs his own death warrant. His
drunkenness and dissolution are not penalties inflicted by
people in authority; they result from his personal disobedi-
ence to spiritualprinciples.
    The same stern threat applies to the group itself. Unless
there is approximate conformity to A.A.'s Twelve Tradi-
tions, the group, too, can deteriorate and die. So we ofA.A.
do obeyspiritual principles, first because we must, and ulti-
mately because we love the kind of life such obedience
brings. Great suffering and great love are A.A.'s disciplinar-
ians; we need no others.
    It is clear now that we ought never to name boards to
govern us, but it is equally clear that we shall always need
to authorize workers to serve us. It is the difference be-
tween the spirit of vested authority and the spirit of service,
two concepts which are sometimes poles apart. It is in this
spirit of service that we elect the A.A. group's informal ro-
tating committee, the intergroup association for the area,

                  T R A D I T I O N   N I N E              175

and the GeneralService Conferences ofAlcoholics Anony-
mous for A.A. as a whole. Even our Foundation, once an
independent board, is todaydirectlyaccountable to our Fel-
lowship. Its trustees are the caretakers and expediters ofour
world services.
    Just as the aim of each A.A. member is personal sobri-
ety, the aim of our services is to bring sobriety within reach
of all who want it. If nobody does the group's chores, if the
area's telephone rings unanswered, if we do not replyto our
mail, then A.A. as we know it would stop. Our communi-
cations lines with those who need our help would be
broken.
    A.A. has to function, but at the same time it must avoid
those dangers of great wealth, prestige, and entrenched
power which necessarilytempt other societies. Though Tra-
dition Nine at first sight seems to deal with a purely
practical matter, in its actual operation it discloses a society
without organization, animated only by the spirit of service
--a true fellowship.

                      Tradition Ten

        "Alcoholics Anonymous has no opinion on
        outside issues; hence the A.A. name ought
        never be drawn into public controversy."



NEVER        since it began has Alcoholics Anonymous been
divided bya major controversialissue. Nor has our Fellow-
ship ever publicly taken sides on any question in an
embattled world. This, however, has been no earned virtue.
It could almost be said that we were born with it, for, as one
oldtimer recently declared, "Practically never have I heard
a heated religious, political, or reform argument among
A.A. members. So long as we don't argue these matters pri-
vately, it's a cinch we never shallpublicly."
    As by some deep instinct, we A.A.'s have known from
the very beginning that we must never, no matter what the
provocation, publicly take sides in any fight, even a worthy
one. All history affords us the spectacle of striving nations
and groups finallytorn asunder because theywere designed
for, or tempted into, controversy. Others fell apart because
of sheer self-righteousness while trying to enforce upon the
rest of mankind some millennium of their own specifica-
tion. In our own times, we have seen millions die in
political and economic wars often spurred by religious and
racial difference. We live in the imminent possibility of a
fresh holocaust to determine how men shall be governed,
and how the products of nature and toil shall be divided

                              176

                    T R A D I T I O N    T E N              177

among them. That is the spiritual climate in which A.A.
was born, and byGod's grace has nevertheless flourished.
    Let us reemphasize that this reluctance to fight one an-
other or anybody else is not counted as some special virtue
which makes us feel superior to other people. Nor does it
mean that the members of Alcoholics Anonymous, now re-
stored as citizens ofthe world, are going to back awayfrom
their individual responsibilities to act as they see the right
upon issues of our time. But when it comes to A.A. as a
whole, that's quite a different matter. In this respect, we do
not enter into public controversy, because we know that our
Society will perish if it does. We conceive the survival and
spread of Alcoholics Anonymous to be something of far
greater importance than the weight we could collectively
throw back of any other cause. Since recovery from alco-
holism is life itself to us, it is imperative that we preserve in
fullstrength our means ofsurvival.
    Maybe this sounds as though the alcoholics in A.A. had
suddenly gone peaceable, and become one great big happy
family. Of course, this isn't so at all. Human beings that we
are, we squabble. Before we leveled off a bit, A.A. looked
more like one prodigious squabble than anything else, at
least on the surface. A corporation director who had just
voted a company expenditure of a hundred thousand dol-
lars would appear at an A.A. business meeting and blow his
top over an outlay of twenty-five dollars' worth of needed
postage stamps. Disliking the attempt of some to manage a
group, half its membership might angrily rush off to form
another group more to their liking. Elders, temporarily
turned Pharisee, have sulked. Bitter attacks have been di-

178               T R A D I T I O N   T E N

rected against people suspected of mixed motives. Despite
their din, our puny rows never did A.A. a particle of harm.
They were just part and parcel of learning to work and live
together. Let it be noted, too, that they were almost always
concerned with ways to make A.A. more effective, how to
do the most good for the most alcoholics.
    The Washingtonian Society, a movement among alco-
holics which started in Baltimore a century ago, almost
discovered the answer to alcoholism. At first, the society
was composed entirely of alcoholics trying to help one an-
other. The earlymembers foresaw that theyshould dedicate
themselves to this sole aim. In manyrespects, the Washing-
tonians were akin to A.A. of today. Their membership
passed the hundred thousand mark. Had they been left to
themselves, and had theystuck to their one goal, theymight
have found the rest of the answer. But this didn't happen.
Instead, the Washingtonians permitted politicians and re-
formers, both alcoholic and nonalcoholic, to use the society
for their own purposes. Abolition of slavery, for example,
was a stormy political issue then. Soon, Washingtonian
speakers violently and publicly took sides on this question.
Maybe the society could have survived the abolition con-
troversy, but it didn't have a chance from the moment it
determined to reform America's drinking habits. When the
Washingtonians became temperance crusaders, within a
very few years they had completely lost their effectiveness
in helping alcoholics.
    The lesson to be learned from the Washingtonians was
not overlooked byAlcoholics Anonymous. As we surveyed
the wreck of that movement, early A.A. members resolved

                  T R A D I T I O N T E N            179

to keep our Society out of public controversy. Thus was
laid the cornerstone for Tradition Ten: "AlcoholicsAnony-
mous has no opinion on outside issues; hence the A.A.
name ought never be drawn into public controversy."

                  Tradition Eleven

        "Our public relations policy is based on at-
        traction rather than promotion; we need al-
        ways maintain personal anonymity at the
        level of press, radio and films."

WITHOUT         its legions ofwell-wishers, A.A. could never
have grown as it has. Throughout the world, immense and
favorable publicity of every description has been the princi-
pal means of bringing alcoholics into our Fellowship. In
A.A. offices, clubs, and homes, telephones ring constantly.
One voice says, "I read a piece in the newspapers . . ."; an-
other, "We heard a radio program . . ."; and still another,
"We saw a moving picture . . ." or "We saw something
about A.A. on television. . . ." It is no exaggeration to say
that half of A.A.'s membership has been led to us through
channels like these.
    The inquiring voices are not all alcoholics or their fami-
lies. Doctors read medical papers about Alcoholics
Anonymous and call for more information. Clergymen see
articles in their church journals and also make inquiries.
Employers learn that great corporations have set their ap-
proval upon us, and wish to discover what can be done
about alcoholismin their own firms.
    Therefore, a great responsibility fell upon us to develop
the best possible public relations policy for Alcoholics
Anonymous. Through many painful experiences, we think
we have arrived at what that policyought to be. It is the op-

                              180

                T R A D I T I O N  E L E V E N              181

posite in many ways of usual promotional practice. We
found that we had to rely upon the principle of attraction
rather thanofpromotion.
    Let's see how these two contrasting ideas--attraction
and promotion--work out. A political party wishes to win
an election, so it advertises the virtues of its leadership to
draw votes. A worthy charity wants to raise money; forth-
with, its letterhead shows the name of every distinguished
person whose support can be obtained. Much of the politi-
cal, economic, and religious life of the world is dependent
upon publicized leadership. People who symbolize causes
and ideas fill a deep human need. We of A.A. do not ques-
tion that. But we do have to soberly face the fact that being
in the public eye is hazardous, especiallyfor us. Bytemper-
ament, nearly every one of us had been an irrepressible
promoter, and the prospect of a society composed almost
entirely of promoters was frightening. Considering this ex-
plosive factor, we knew we had to exercise self-restraint.
    The way this restraint paid off was startling. It resulted
in more favorable publicity of Alcoholics Anonymous than
could possibly have been obtained through all the arts and
abilities of A.A.'s best press agents. Obviously, A.A. had to
be publicized somehow, so we resorted to the idea that it
would be far better to let our friends do this for us. Precisely
that has happened, to an unbelievable extent. Veteran news-
men, trained doubters that they are, have gone all out to
carry A.A.'s message. To them, we are something more
than the source ofgood stories. On almost everynewsfront,
the men and women of the press have attached themselves
to us as friends.

182             T R A D I T I O N E L E V E N

    In the beginning, the press could not understand our re-
fusal of all personal publicity. They were genuinely baffled
by our insistence upon anonymity. Then they got the point.
Here was something rare in the world--a society which
said it wished to publicize its principles and its work, but
not its individual members. The press was delighted with
this attitude. Ever since, these friends have reported A.A.
with an enthusiasm which the most ardent members would
find hard to match.
    There was actually a time when the press of America
thought the anonymity of A.A. was better for us than some
of our own members did. At one point, about a hundred of
our Society were breaking anonymity at the public level.
With perfectly good intent, these folks declared that the
principle of anonymity was horse-and-buggy stuff, some-
thing appropriate to A.A.'s pioneering days. Theywere sure
that A.A. could go faster and farther if it availed itself of
modern publicitymethods. A.A., theypointed out, included
many persons of local, national, or international fame. Pro-
vided they were willing--and many were--why shouldn't
their membership be publicized, thereby encouraging oth-
ers to join us? These were plausible arguments, but happily
our friends ofthe writing profession disagreed with them.
    The Foundation* wrote letters to practically every news
outlet in North America, setting forth our public relations
policyof attraction rather than promotion, and emphasizing
Since that time, editors and rewrite men have repeatedly
deleted names and pictures of members from A.A. copy;
frequently, they have reminded ambitious individuals of
A.A.'s anonymity policy. They have even sacrificed good

                T R A D I T I O N  E L E V E N          183

stories to this end. The force of their cooperation has cer-
tainly helped. Only a few A.A. members are left who
deliberatelybreak anonymityat the public level.
    This, in brief, is the process by which A.A.'s Tradition
Eleven was constructed. To us, however, it represents far
more than a sound public relations policy. It is more than a
denialofself-seeking. This Tradition is a constant and prac-
tical reminder that personal ambition has no place in A.A.
In it, each member becomes an active guardian of our Fel-
lowship.

                  Tradition Twelve

        "Anonymity is the spiritual foundation of all
        our traditions, ever reminding us to place
        principles before personalities."

THE     spiritual substance of anonymity is sacrifice. Be-
causeA.A.'sTwelve Traditions repeatedlyask us to give up
personal desires for the common good, we realize that the
sacrificial spirit--well symbolized by anonymity--is the
foundation of them all. It is A.A.'s proved willingness to
make these sacrifices that gives people their high confi-
dence in our future.
    But in the beginning, anonymity was not born of confi-
dence; it was the child of our early fears. Our first nameless
groups of alcoholics were secret societies. New prospects
could find us only through a few trusted friends. The bare
hint of publicity, even for our work, shocked us. Though
ex-drinkers, we still thought we had to hide from public
distrust and contempt.
    When the Big Book appeared in 1939, we called it "Al-
coholics Anonymous." Its foreword made this revealing
statement: "It is important that we remain anonymous be-
cause we are too few, at present, to handle the
overwhelming number of personal appeals which may re-
sult from this publication. Being mostly business or
professional folk, we could not well carry on our occupa-
tions in such an event." Between these lines, it is easy to
read our fear that large numbers of incoming people might
break our anonymitywide open.

                             184

               T R A D I T I O N  T W E L V E             185

   As the A.A. groups multiplied, so did anonymity prob-
lems. Enthusiastic over the spectacular recovery of a
brother alcoholic, we'd sometimes discuss those intimate
and harrowing aspects of his case meant for his sponsor's
ear alone. The aggrieved victim would then tightly declare
that his trust had been broken. When such stories got into
circulation outside of A.A., the loss of confidence in our
anonymity promise was severe. It frequently turned people
from us. Clearly, every A.A. member's name--and story,
too--had to be confidential, if he wished. This was our first
lesson in the practicalapplication ofanonymity.
   With characteristic intemperance, however, some ofour
newcomers cared not at all for secrecy. They wanted to
shout A.A. from the housetops, and did, Alcoholics barely
dry rushed about bright-eyed, buttonholing anyone who
would listen to their stories. Others hurried to place them
selves before microphones and cameras. Sometimes, they
got distressingly drunk and let their groups down with a
bang. They had changed from A.A. members into A.A.
show-offs.
   This phenomenon of contrast really set us thinking.
Squarely before us was the question "How anonymous
should an A.A. member be?" Our growth made it plain that
we couldn't be a secret society, but it was equally plain that
we couldn't be a vaudeville circuit, either. The charting of a
safe path between these extremes took a long time.
   As a rule, the average newcomer wanted his family to
know immediately what he was trying to do. He also want-
ed to tell others who had tried to help him--his doctor, his
minister, and close friends. As he gained confidence, he felt

186             T R A D I T I O N T W E L V E

it right to explain his new way of life to his employer and
business associates. When opportunities to be helpful came
along, he found he could talk easily about A.A. to almost
anyone. These quiet disclosures helped him to lose his fear
of the alcoholic stigma, and spread the news of A.A.'s exis-
tence in his community. Many a new man and woman
came to A.A. because ofsuch conversations. Though not in
the strict letter of anonymity, such communications were
wellwithin its spirit.
    But it became apparent that the word-of-mouth method
was too limited. Our work, as such, needed to be publi-
cized. The A.A. groups would have to reach quickly as
many despairing alcoholics as they could. Consequently,
many groups began to hold meetings which were open to
interested friends and the public, so that the average citizen
could see for himself just what A.A. was all about. The re-
sponse to these meetings was warmly sympathetic. Soon,
groups began to receive requests for A.A. speakers to ap-
pear before civic organizations, church groups, and medical
societies. Provided anonymity was maintained on these
platforms, and reporters present were cautioned against the
use ofnames or pictures, the result was fine.
    Then came our first few excursions into major publicity,
which were breathtaking. Cleveland's Plain Dealer articles
about us ran that town's membership from a few into hun-
dreds overnight. The news stories of Mr. Rockefeller's
dinner for Alcoholics Anonymous helped double our total
membership in a year's time. Jack Alexander's famous Sat-
urday Evening Post piece made A.A. a national institution.
Such tributes as these brought opportunities for still more

                T R A D I T I O N  T W E L V E            187

recognition. Other newspapers and magazines wanted A.A.
stories. Film companies wanted to photograph us. Radio,
and finally television, besieged us with requests for appear-
ances. What should we do?
    As this tide offering top public approval swept in, we
realized that it could do us incalculable good or great harm.
Everything would depend upon how it was channeled. We
simply couldn't afford to take the chance of letting self-ap-
pointed members present themselves as messiahs
representing A.A. before the whole public. The promoter
instinct in us might be our undoing. Ifeven one publiclygot
drunk, or was lured into using A.A.'s name for his own pur-
poses, the damage might be irreparable. At this altitude
(press, radio, films, and television), anonymity--100 per-
cent anonymity--was the only possible answer. Here,
principles would have to come before personalities, without
exception.
    These experiences taught us that anonymity is real hu-
mility at work. It is an all-pervading spiritual quality which
today keynotes A.A. life everywhere. Moved by the spirit
of anonymity, we try to give up our natural desires for per-
sonal distinction as A.A. members both among fellow
alcoholics and before the general public. As we lay aside
these very human aspirations, we believe that each of us
takes part in the weaving of a protective mantle which cov-
ers our whole Society and under which we may grow and
work in unity.
    We are sure that humility, expressed by anonymity, is
the greatest safeguard that Alcoholics Anonymous can ever
have.


           Traditions--Long Form

                  (The Twelve Traditions)


Our A.A. experience has taught us that:

One--Each member of Alcoholics Anonymous is but a
small part of a great whole. A.A. must continue to live or
most of us will surely die. Hence our common welfare
comes first. But individualwelfare follows close afterward.

Two--For our group purpose there is but one ultimate au-
thority--a loving God as He may express Himself in our
group conscience.

Three--Our membership ought to include all who suffer
from alcoholism. Hence we may refuse none who wish to
recover. Nor ought A.A. membership ever depend on mon-
ey or conformity. Any two or three alcoholics gathered
together for sobriety may call themselves an A.A. group,
provided that, as a group, theyhave no other affiliation.

Four--With respect to its own affairs, each A.A. group
should be responsible to no other authority other than its
own conscience. But when its plans concern the welfare of
neighboring groups also, those groups ought to be consult-
ed. And no group, regionalcommittee, or individualshould
ever take any action that might greatly affect A.A. as a
whole without conferring with the trustees of the General
Service Board. On such issues our common welfare is
paramount.

                             189

190        T R A D I T I O N S -- L O N G   F O R M

Five--Each Alcoholics Anonymous group ought to be a
spiritual entity having but one primary purpose--that of
carrying its message to the alcoholic who stillsuffers.

Six--Problems ofmoney, property, and authoritymayeas-
ily divert us from our primary spiritual aim. We think,
therefore, that any considerable property of genuine use to
A.A. should be separately incorporated and managed, thus
dividing the material from the spiritual. An A.A. group, as
such, should never go into business. Secondaryaids to A.A.
such as clubs or hospitals which require much property or
administration, ought to be incorporated and so set apart
that, if necessary, they can be freely discarded by the
groups. Hence such facilities ought not to use the A.A.
name. Their management should be the sole responsibility
of those people who financially support them. For clubs,
A.A. managers are usually preferred. But hospitals, as well
as other places of recuperation, ought to be well outside
A.A.--and medically supervised. While an A.A. group
may cooperate with anyone, such cooperation ought never
to go so far as affiliation or endorsement, actual or implied.
An A.A. group can bind itselfto no one.

Seven--The A.A. groups themselves ought to be fullysup-
ported by the voluntary contributions of their own
members. We think that each group should soon achieve
this ideal; that any public solicitation of funds using the
name of Alcoholics Anonymous is highly dangerous
whether by groups, clubs, hospitals, or other outside agen-
cies, that acceptance of large gifts from any source, or of
contributions carrying any obligation whatever, is unwise.

           T R A D I T I O N S -- L O N G      F O R M        191

Then, too, we view with much concern those A.A. trea-
suries which continue, beyond prudent reserves, to
accumulate funds for no stated A.A. purpose. Experience
has often warned us that nothing can so surely destroy our
spiritual heritage as futile disputes over property, money,
and authority.

Eight--Alcoholics Anonymous should remain forever
nonprofessional. We define professionalism as the occupa-
tion of counseling alcoholics for fees or hire. But we may
employ alcoholics where they are going to perform those
services for which we might otherwise have to engage non-
alcoholics.    Such     special     services   may     be    well
recompensed. But our usual A.A. Twelfth Step work is
never to be paid for.

Nine--Each A.A. group needs the least possible organiza-
tion. Rotating leadership is the best. The small group may
elect its secretary, the large group its rotating committee,
and the groups of a large metropolitan area their central or
intergroup committee, which often employs a full-time sec-
retary. The trustees of the General Service Board are, in
effect, our A.A. General Service Committee. They are the
custodians ofour A.A. Traditionand the receivers ofvolun-
tary A.A. contributions by which we maintain our A.A.
General Service Office in New York. They are authorized
by the groups to handle our overall public relations, and
they guarantee the integrity of our principal newspaper, the
A.A. Grapevine. All such representatives are to be guided
in the spirit of service, for true leaders in A.A. are but trust-
ed and experienced servants of the whole. They derive no

192       T R A D I T I O N S -- L O N G    F O R M

real authority from their titles; they do not govern. Univer-
salrespect is the keyto their usefulness.

Ten--No A.A. group or member should ever, in such a
way as to implicate A.A., express any opinion on outside
controversial issues--particularly those of politics, alcohol
reform, or sectarian religion. The Alcoholics Anonymous
groups oppose no one. Concerning such matters they can
express no views whatsoever.

Eleven--Our relations with the general public should be
characterized bypersonalanonymity. We think A.A. should
avoid sensational advertising. Our names and pictures as
A.A. members ought not be broadcast, filmed, or publicly
printed. Our public relations should be guided by the prin-
ciple of attraction rather than promotion. There is never
need to praise ourselves. We feel it better that our friends
recommend us.

Twelve--And finally, we of Alcoholics Anonymous be-
lieve that the principle of anonymity has an immense
spiritual significance. It reminds us that we are to place
principles before personalities; that we are to practice a
genuine humility. This to the end that our great blessings
may never spoil us; that we shall forever live in thankful
contemplation ofHimwho presides over us all.



