IT WORKS

       IT WORKS
   HOW          AND          WHY


   The Twelve Steps
and Twelve Traditions
of Narcotics Anonymous




   NARCOTICS ANONYMOUS WORLD SERVICES, INC.
           CHATSWORTH, CALIFORNIA

      The Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions reprinted
              for adaptation by permission of
                  AA World Services, Inc.

                    World Service Office
                        PO Box 9999
                   Van Nuys, CA 91409
                    Tel. (818) 773-9999
                    Fax (818) 700-0700
                    Website: www.na.org

               World Service Office­EUROPE
                     48 Rue de l'Eté 48
                 B-1050 Brussels, Belgium
                   Tel. +32/2/646-6012
                   Fax +32/2/649-9239

               World Service Office­CANADA
                150 Britannia Rd. E. Unit 21
           Mississauga, Ontario, L4Z 2A4, Canada
                    Tel. (905) 507-0100
                    Fax (905) 507-0101

                     Copyright © 1993;
                CD-ROM version © 2003 by
         Narcotics Anonymous World Services, Inc.
                    All Rights Reserved



                              LLOWSH
                             E      IP
                            F




                            A
                             P       D
                              P    E
                                ROV



         This is NA Fellowship-approved literature.

    Narcotics Anonymous,                 and The NA Way
                are registered trademarks of
     Narcotics Anonymous World Services, Incorporated.

ISBN 1-55776-510-3            English                 3/03

                WSO Catalog Item No. 8910

All blue text is linked to indicated location




                                       TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                      Introduction        i

                                   Book One: The Twelve Steps

                                      Step One            3

                                      Step Two           12

                                      Step Three         19

                                      Step Four          26

                                      Step Five          35

                                      Step Six           42

                                      Step Seven         49

                                      Step Eight         54

                                      Step Nine          60

                                      Step Ten           69

                                      Step Eleven        76

                                      Step Twelve        82

All blue text is linked to indicated location




                           Book Two: The Twelve Traditions

                                  Tradition One       91

                                  Tradition Two       98

                                  Tradition Three     106

                                  Tradition Four      111

                                  Tradition Five      117

                                  Tradition Six       122

                                  Tradition Seven     128

                                  Tradition Eight     136

                                  Tradition Nine      139

                                  Tradition Ten       144

                                  Tradition Eleven    149

                                  Tradition Twelve    153

                                  Index               159

                       INTRODUCTION

    Welcome! The book you have in your hands is a discussion of
the Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions of Narcotics Anonymous. We
realize that, whether written or verbal, no discussion of something
as personal and individual as recovery can be all things to all people.
This book is not meant to be an exhaustive study of NA's steps and
traditions, nor is it meant to be the final word on any aspect of re-
covery or NA unity. Rather, it is meant to help you determine your
own interpretation of the principles contained in our steps and tra-
ditions. We hope you will find personal growth, understanding, and
empathy in the following pages. We pray you will be moved to a new
level of insight into your recovery and the valuable place you occupy
as a member of Narcotics Anonymous.
    Each member of NA has contributed to this book in some way.
Whether you are new to recovery or one of our longtime members,
your experience, your support, and, above all, your presence in the
rooms where addicts meet to share recovery have been the motivat-
ing forces behind the production of this book. Though the process
of writing a book about the experience of a fellowship as diverse as
ours has been lengthy, we saw all the barriers and stumbling blocks
fade away in the light of our primary purpose: to carry the message
to the still-suffering addict. That one purpose, clear and powerful,
stands alone in our collective consciousness as the only thing that
really matters. With that, all is possible and miracles happen.
     The nature of the recovery process gave us the title for this book.
After all was said and done, one fundamental truth emerged as the
crux of our program: IT WORKS. The reasons our program works, the
how and why of recovery, are found in many places: in each other, in
our relationship with a Higher Power, in our hearts and minds, and fi-
nally, in the collective wisdom of our members. Because our principal
endeavor in the development of this book has been to capture that col-


                                    i

lective wisdom in written form, we believe the title of this book is
most appropriate: It Works: How & Why.
    We pray that this book truly represents the therapeutic value of
one addict helping another. We offer this book as a gift, addict to
addict, and hope our love and concern for every addict who is trying
our way of life comes across as strongly as we feel it. Please use
and enjoy this book. Share it with your friends, your sponsor, and
the people you sponsor. After all, it is through sharing with each other
that we find our own answers, our own Higher Power, and our own
path of recovery.




                                   ii

                          BOOK ONE

                   The Twelve Steps

The purpose of this portion of the book is to invite members to en-
gage in a journey of recovery and to serve as a resource in gaining a
personal understanding of the spiritual principles in the Twelve Steps
of Narcotics Anonymous. This portion of the book explores the spiri-
tual principles in each step and how we experience them in our lives.
We believe that the steps are presented in a manner that encom-
passes the diversity of our fellowship and is reflective of the spiritual
awakening described in our Twelfth Step.

                                   Step One                            3


                             STEP ONE

            "We admitted that we were powerless over our addiction,
                  that our lives had become unmanageable."

    As addicts, we have each experienced the pain, loneliness, and
despair of addiction. Before coming to NA, most of us tried every-
thing we could think of to control our use of drugs. We tried switch-
ing drugs, thinking that we only had a problem with one particular
drug. We tried limiting our drug use to certain times or places. We
may even have vowed to stop using altogether at a certain point. We
may have told ourselves we would never do the things we watched
other addicts do, then found ourselves doing those very things. Noth-
ing we tried had any lasting effect. Our active addiction continued
to progress, overpowering even our best intentions. Alone, terrified
of what the future held for us, we found the Fellowship of Narcotics
Anonymous.
    As members of Narcotics Anonymous, our experience is that ad-
diction is a progressive disease. The progression may be rapid or
slow, but it is always downhill. As long as we are using drugs, our
lives will steadily get worse. It would be impossible to precisely de-
scribe addiction in a way that is agreeable to everyone. However,
the disease seems to affect us in the following general ways. Men-
tally, we become obsessed with thoughts of using. Physically, we de-
velop a compulsion to continue using, regardless of the conse-
quences. Spiritually, we become totally self-centered in the course
of our addiction. Looking at addiction as a disease makes sense to
a lot of addicts because, in our experience, addiction is progressive,
incurable, and can be fatal unless arrested.
    In Narcotics Anonymous, we deal with every aspect of our ad-
diction, not just its most obvious symptom: our uncontrollable drug
use. The aspects of our disease are numerous. By practicing this



                                       3

4                                It Works


program, we each discover the ways in which our addiction affects
us personally. Regardless of the individual effects of addiction on our
lives, all of us share some common characteristics. Through work-
ing the First Step we will address the obsession, the compulsion, the
denial, and what many have termed a "spiritual void."
    As we examine and acknowledge all these aspects of our disease,
we start to understand our powerlessness. Many of us have had prob-
lems with the idea that, as addicts, we are obsessive and compul-
sive. The idea that these words applied to us may have made us
cringe. However, obsession and compulsion are aspects of our pow-
erlessness. We need to understand and acknowledge their presence
in our lives if our admission of powerlessness is to be complete. Ob-
session, for us, is the never-ending stream of thoughts relating to us-
ing drugs, running out of drugs, getting more drugs, and so on. We
simply can't get these thoughts out of our minds. In our experience,
compulsion is the irrational impulse to continue using drugs, no mat-
ter what happens as a result. We just can't stop. We address obses-
sion and compulsion here as they relate to our drug use because,
when we first come into the program, our drug addiction is how we
identify with each other and the program. As we continue in our re-
covery, we will see how these aspects of our addiction can manifest
themselves in many areas of our lives.
    Denial is the part of our disease that makes it difficult, if not im-
possible, for us to acknowledge reality. In our addiction, denial pro-
tected us from seeing the reality of what our lives had become. We
often told ourselves that, given the right set of circumstances, we
might still be able to bring our lives under control. Always skillful at
defending our actions, we refused to accept responsibility for the
damage done by our addiction. We believed that if we tried long and
hard enough, substituted one drug for another, switched friends, or
changed our living arrangements or occupations, our lives would im-
prove. These rationalizations repeatedly failed us, yet we continued

                                Step One                              5


to cling to them. We denied that we had a problem with drugs, re-
gardless of all evidence to the contrary. We lied to ourselves, believ-
ing that we could use again successfully. We justified our actions,
despite the wreckage around us resulting from our addiction.
   The spiritual part of our disease, the part we may recognize only
by a feeling of emptiness or loneliness when we first get clean, is per-
haps one of the most difficult aspects of addiction for us. Because
this part of our disease affects us so profoundly and so personally,
we may be overwhelmed when we think about applying a program of
recovery to it. However, we need to keep in mind that recovery
doesn't happen overnight for anyone.
   As we start to look at the effects of our disease, we are sure to
see that our lives have become unmanageable. We see it in all the
things that are wrong with our lives. Again, our experiences are indi-
vidual and vary widely from addict to addict. Some of us realized
our lives had become unmanageable because we felt out of control
emotionally or began to feel guilty about our drug use. Some of us
have lost everything--our homes, our families, our jobs, and our self-
respect. Some of us never learned how to function as human
beings at all. Some of us have spent time in jails and institutions.
And some of us have come very close to death. Whatever our indi-
vidual circumstances, our lives have been governed by obsessive,
compulsive, self-seeking behavior, and the end result has been
unmanageability.
   Perhaps we arrived in NA without recognizing the problems we
had for what they were. Because of our self-centeredness, we were
often the last ones to realize that we were addicts. Many of us were
persuaded by friends or family to begin attending NA meetings. Other
members received even stronger encouragement from the courts. No
matter how it occurred, our long-standing illusions had to be shat-
tered. Honesty had to replace denial before we could face the truth
of our addiction.

6                                 It Works


    Many of us recall the moment of clarity when we came face to
face with our disease. All the lies, all the pretenses, all the rational-
izations we had used to justify where we stood as a result of our drug
use stopped working. Who and what we were became more clear.
We could no longer avoid the truth.
    We have found that we cannot recover without the ability to be
honest. Many of us came to NA after spending years practicing dis-
honesty. However, we can learn to be honest, and we must begin to
try. Learning to be honest is an ongoing process; we are able to be-
come progressively more honest as we work the steps and continue
to stay clean. In the First Step, we begin to practice the spiritual prin-
ciple of honesty by admitting the truth about our drug use. Then we
go on to admit the truth about our lives. We face what is, not the
way things could be or should be. It doesn't matter where we come
from or how good or bad we think we've had it; when we finally turn
to Narcotics Anonymous and the Twelve Steps, we begin to find relief.
    As we begin working the First Step, it is important to ask ourselves
some basic personal questions: Can I control my use of drugs? Am
I willing to stop using? Am I willing to do whatever it takes to re-
cover? Given a choice between finding a new way of life in NA and
continuing in our addiction, recovery begins to appeal to us.
    We begin to let go of our reservations, those parts of ourselves
we won't surrender to the program. Most of us do have some reser-
vations when we first get clean. Even so, we need to find ways of
addressing them. Reservations can be anything: a belief that, because
we never had a problem with one particular drug, we can still use it;
placing a condition on our recovery, such as only staying clean as
long as our expectations are met; a belief that we can still be involved
with the people associated with our addiction; a belief that we can
use again after a certain amount of time clean; a conscious or un-
conscious decision to work only certain steps. With the help of other
recovering addicts, we can find ways to put our reservations behind

                                  Step One                                7


us. The most important thing for us to know about reservations is
that, by keeping them, we are reserving a place in our program for
relapse.
    Recovery begins when we start to apply the spiritual principles
contained in the Twelve Steps of NA to all areas of our lives. We re-
alize, however, that we cannot begin this process unless we stop us-
ing drugs. Total abstinence from all drugs is the only way we can
begin to overcome our addiction. While abstinence is the beginning,
our only hope for recovery is a profound emotional and spiritual
change.
    Our experience shows that it is necessary for us to be willing to
do anything it takes to obtain this precious gift of recovery. In re-
covery, we will be introduced to spiritual principles such as the sur-
render, honesty, and acceptance required for the First Step. If we
faithfully practice these principles, they will transform our perceptions
and the way we live our lives.
    When we first begin to practice these principles, they may seem
very unnatural to us. It may take a deliberate effort on our part to
make the honest admission called for in Step One. Even though we
are admitting our addiction, we may still wonder if this program will
really work. Acceptance of our addiction is something that goes be-
yond our conscious admission. When we accept our addiction, we
gain the hope of recovery. We begin to believe on a deep level that
we, too, can recover. We begin to let go of our doubts and truly come
to terms with our disease. We become open to change. We surrender.
    As we work the First Step, we find that surrender is not what we
thought it was. In the past, we probably thought of surrender as
something that only weak and cowardly people did. We saw only two
choices: either keep fighting to control our using or just cave in com-
pletely and let our lives fall to pieces. We felt we were in a battle to
control our using and that, if we surrendered, the drugs would win.
In recovery, we find that surrender involves letting go of our reservations

8                                 It Works


about recovery and being willing to try a different approach to living
life. The process of surrender is extremely personal for each one of
us. Only we, as individuals, know when we've done it. We stress the
importance of surrender, for it is the very process that enables us to
recover. When we surrender, we know in our hearts that we've had
enough. We're tired of fighting. A relief comes over us as we finally
realize that the struggle is over.
     No matter how hard we fought, we finally reached the point of
surrender where we realized that we couldn't stop using drugs on our
own. We were able to admit our powerlessness over our addiction.
We gave up completely. Even though we didn't know exactly what
would happen, we gathered up our courage and admitted our pow-
erlessness. We gave up the illusion that we could control our using,
thereby opening the door to recovery.
     Many of us begin the process of surrender when we identify our-
selves at an NA meeting with our name and the words, "I am an ad-
dict." Once we admit that we are addicts and that we cannot stop
using on our own, we are able to stay clean on a daily basis with the
help of other recovering addicts in Narcotics Anonymous. The para-
dox of this admission is evident once we work the First Step. As long
as we think we can control our drug use, we are almost forced to
continue. The minute we admit we're powerless, we never have to
use again. This reprieve from having to use is the most profound
gift we can receive, for it saves our lives.
     Through our collective experience, we have found that we can ac-
complish together what we cannot do alone. It is necessary for us
to seek help from other recovering addicts. As we attend meetings
regularly, we can find great comfort in the experiences of those trav-
eling this path with us. Coming to NA has been described by many
members as "coming home." We find ourselves welcomed and ac-
cepted by other recovering addicts. We finally find a place where we
belong.

                                 Step One                             9


    Though we are sure to be helped by the sharing we hear at meet-
ings, we need to find a sponsor to help us in our recovery. Begin-
ning with the First Step, a sponsor can share with us his or her own
experience with the steps. Listening to our sponsor's experience and
applying it to our own lives is how we take advantage of one of the
most beautiful and practical aspects of recovery: the therapeutic value
of one addict helping another. We hear in our meetings that "I can't,
but we can." Actively working with a sponsor will give us some first-
hand experience with this. Through our developing relationship with
our sponsor, we learn about the principle of trust. By following the
suggestions of our sponsor instead of only our own ideas, we learn
the principles of open-mindedness and willingness. Our sponsor will
help us work the steps of recovery.
    Talking honestly with our sponsor about our drug use and how it
affected our lives will help us work the First Step thoroughly. We need
always remember where we came from and where our addiction took
us. We have only a daily reprieve from our active addiction. Each
day, we accept the fact that we cannot use drugs successfully.
    The process of recovery isn't easy. It takes great courage and per-
severance to continue in recovery day after day. Part of the recovery
process is to move forward in spite of whatever may stand in our way.
Because long-lasting change in recovery happens slowly, we will turn
to the First Step again and again.
    Even long periods of abstinence do not guarantee us continued
freedom from the pain and trouble that addiction can bring. The
symptoms of our disease can always return. We may find that we
are powerless in ways we never imagined. This is where we begin to
understand how the things we tried so hard to control are, in reality,
completely beyond our control. No matter how our disease displays
itself, we must take its deadly nature into account. As we do, we
develop a fuller awareness of the nature of our disease.

10                               It Works


    The disease of addiction can manifest itself in a variety of men-
tal obsessions and compulsive actions that have nothing to do with
drugs. We sometimes find ourselves obsessed and behaving com-
pulsively over things we may never have had problems with until we
stopped using drugs. We may once again try to fill the awful empti-
ness we sometimes feel with something outside ourselves. Any time
we find ourselves using something to change the way we feel, we need
to apply the principles of the First Step.
    We are never immune from having our lives become unmanage-
able, even after years of recovery. If problems pile up and our re-
sources for coping with them dwindle, we may feel out of control and
in too much pain to do anything constructive for ourselves. We feel
overwhelmed by life, and that feeling seems to make everything worse.
When our lives seem to be falling apart, we reapply ourselves to the
basics of the NA program. We stay in close contact with our spon-
sor, work the steps, and go to meetings. We surrender again, know-
ing that victory lies in the admission of defeat.
    The feeling of love and acceptance we find in the Fellowship of
Narcotics Anonymous allows us to begin recovering from our addic-
tion. We learn a new way to live. The emptiness from which we suf-
fered is filled through working and living the Twelve Steps. We learn
that our addiction is being addressed in all its complexity by this
simple program. We have found a solution to our hopelessness.
    There is a deeply spiritual nature to our program of recovery. The
Twelve Steps of Narcotics Anonymous will take us on a journey that
will far exceed our expectations. Working and living the steps will lead
us to a spiritual awakening. Step One is the beginning of this spiri-
tual journey. To get started on this journey, we must become willing
to surrender to this program and its principles, for our future hinges
on our willingness to grow spiritually.
    We are starting a new way of life, one that offers great joy and
happiness. However, recovery doesn't exempt us from pain. Living

                                Step One                            11


life on life's terms combines moments of happiness with moments
of sadness. Wonderful events are mixed with painful ones. We will
experience a full range of feelings about the events in our lives.
    By honestly looking at what we have become in our addiction,
we recognize the powerlessness and unmanageability of our lives.
Moving beyond our reservations, we accept our addiction, surrender,
and experience the hope that recovery offers. We realize that we can
no longer go on as we have been. We are ready for a change. We
are willing to try another way. With our willingness, we move on to
Step Two.

12                                 It Works


                            STEP TWO

                  "We came to believe that a Power greater
                  than ourselves could restore us to sanity."

    Our surrender in the First Step leaves us with a deep need to be-
lieve that we can recover. This surrender makes it possible for us to
feel hope. By admitting our own powerlessness, we open our minds
to an entirely new idea: the possibility that something greater than
ourselves might be powerful enough to relieve our obsession to use
drugs. It is quite likely that, before coming to NA, we never believed
in any power but our own willpower, and that had failed us. NA in-
troduces us to a new understanding. We draw hope from this under-
standing and begin to comprehend what it means to believe that a
Power greater than ourselves can restore us to sanity. We find addi-
tional hope by listening to other recovering addicts. We can relate
to where they've been and draw hope from who they've become. We
listen closely at meetings and become willing to apply what we hear
to our own lives. As we begin to believe that there is hope for us,
we also begin to trust the process of recovery.
    Our White Booklet states, "There is one thing more than anything
else that will defeat us in our recovery; this is an attitude of indiffer-
ence or intolerance toward spiritual principles. Three of these that
are indispensable are honesty, open-mindedness, and willingness."
This doesn't mean we must be unfailingly honest, open-minded, and
willing. We just have to try as best we can to practice these prin-
ciples. As we first approach Step Two, we can practice the principle
of honesty by acknowledging and sharing what we do or don't be-
lieve about a Power greater than ourselves. Developing our open-
mindedness requires some effort, but we can practice this principle
by listening to other recovering addicts share how they came to be-
lieve. For many of us, the willingness to try something new came



                                      12

                                  Step Two                            13


about simply because we were so tired of our old ways. It seemed
to us that, because our own power wasn't sufficient to restore our
sanity, perhaps something else could, if we let it.
    Many of us felt that insanity was too harsh a word to describe
our condition. However, if we take a realistic look at our active ad-
diction, we'll see that we have been anything but sane. For the most
part, our perceptions were not based in reality. We viewed the world
around us as a hostile environment. Some of us withdrew physically
and had little, if any, contact with anyone. Some of us went through
the motions of life but allowed nothing to touch us emotionally. Ei-
ther way, we ended up feeling isolated. Despite evidence to the con-
trary, we felt that we were in control. We ignored or didn't believe
the truths that were staring us in the face. We continued to do the
same things and expected the results to be different. Worst of all
was the fact that we continued to use drugs, regardless of the nega-
tive consequences we experienced. Despite the warning signs that
our drug use was out of control, we continued trying to justify it. All
too often, the result was that we could no longer face ourselves.
When we take a realistic look at our lives, there can be no doubt that
we desperately need a restoration to sanity.
    Regardless of our individual interpretation of the term "restora-
tion," most of us agree that, for us, it means changing to a point where
addiction and its accompanying insanity are not controlling our lives.
Being restored to sanity is a life-long process. Individually, we expe-
rience it differently at varying stages of our recovery, but we all can
see some results of this process right from the beginning of our re-
covery. Initially, being restored to sanity means that we no longer have
to use drugs. We go to meetings rather than isolating. We call our
sponsor rather than sitting alone with painful feelings. We ask for
our sponsor's guidance in working the steps, a real demonstration
of sanity. We begin to believe that a powerful force can restore us to
sanity. At long last, we feel hope for ourselves.

14                               It Works


    "We came to believe" implies a process. For some, this process
is simple, and it may bring immediate results. Many of us arrived in
NA so completely defeated that we were willing to try anything. Seek-
ing help from a Power greater than ourselves may have been the best
idea we had ever heard. However, the process of coming to believe
can be difficult, even painful. Many of us have found that acting as
if we believe is helpful. This does not mean we should be dishonest.
Rather, it means that if we have doubts, we practice the program as
if we believe we can be restored to sanity.
    Belief in a Power greater than ourselves does not come easily to
all of us. However, we have found an open mind indispensable when
we approach this step. If we look around us, we find many reasons
to believe. Our belief may simply be that we can recover from a life
of active addiction. The freedom from the obsession to use may be
our first experience of a Power greater than ourselves at work in our
lives. Perhaps for the first time in many years, our obsession with
drugs no longer controls our every waking moment. Knowing that
we don't have to use today is a powerful belief in and of itself.
    We start to develop faith through the process of coming to be-
lieve. It starts with hope. For some of us, this may be only a faint
spark at first, perhaps just the thought that maybe, if we work this
program, our lives will get better. Our hope turns to faith as our lives
begin to improve. For many of us, faith can be described as a belief
in something intangible. After all, who can logically explain the sud-
den lifting of an obsession to use drugs, yet this has happened for
many of us. With our hope for a different life and the beginnings of
our faith that recovery is possible, we start the process of coming to
believe in a Power greater than ourselves.
    We come from various walks of life and experience, so it is natu-
ral that we bring with us differing concepts of spirituality. In NA, no
one is forced to believe any set ideas. Each one of us can believe in
anything in which we want to believe. This is a spiritual program,

                                  Step Two                                15


not a religion. Individually, we cultivate our own beliefs about a Power
greater than we are. No matter what we understand this Power to
be, help is available to us all.
    In the beginning, many of us turn to the group or the love we
encounter in Narcotics Anonymous as our Higher Power. An NA group
is a powerful example of a Power greater than ourselves at work. Of-
ten in desperation, we enter a room full of addicts who share their
experience, strength, and hope with us. As we listen, we know with
certainty that they have felt the hopelessness and remorse from which
we, too, have suffered. As we observe other addicts practicing a new
way of life without the use of drugs, we may come to believe that
we, too, can recover. Watching other addicts stay clean is compel-
ling proof of the existence of a Power greater than ourselves. We no-
tice the acceptance that recovering addicts show each other. We
watch as addicts celebrate lengths of clean time that we think will
be impossible for us to attain. Perhaps someone hugs us and tells
us to "keep coming back." Members give us their phone numbers.
We feel the power of the group, and this helps us start to heal.
    Many of us use spiritual principles as a power greater than our-
selves. We come to believe that, by practicing these principles in our
lives, we can be restored to sanity. This makes sense to us because
we have tried many times to think ourselves into a better way of life.
We usually had good intentions, but our day-to-day existence rarely
measured up to those intentions. Trying it the other way, practicing
a better way of life by living according to spiritual principles, will even-
tually have an effect on our thinking.
    It is not necessary that we define for ourselves the entire con-
cept of a Power greater than ourselves. Those of us with many years
of recovery find that our understanding of a Higher Power changes
over time. Our belief grows, as does our faith. We come to believe
in a Power which can help us far more than we originally thought.

16                               It Works


    As we search for understanding of a Higher Power, we can talk
with our sponsor and other recovering addicts. We may ask them
what their idea of a Higher Power is and how they have arrived at it.
This may open our minds to possibilities we hadn't considered before.
    While it is useful to question others about their spiritual beliefs,
we must remember that our understanding of a Power greater than
ourselves is up to each individual. Others can help us. We may even
adopt the ideas of someone else for a while or just believe that they
believe. Eventually, however, we need to come to believe for our-
selves. The need for our own sense of spirituality is too vital to our
recovery for us to neglect this highly personal process.
    For us, part of the process of coming to believe is accepting the
evidence we see. Our addiction caused us to deny the truths we saw.
But now, in recovery, we can believe what we see. At first, we open our
minds and try something new, somehow believing that what we try might
work. After we take a few small steps toward belief and trust and see
results, we become willing to take bigger steps. We find that we are no
longer acting as if we believe. Our belief is now reinforced with our own
personal experience, some of which is unexplainable. We sometimes en-
counter remarkable coincidences in our lives that have no rational ex-
planation. We don't need to explain or analyze these occurrences. We
can simply accept that they happen and be grateful for them.
    The longer we stay clean, the more evident it becomes that our
addiction goes much deeper than the drugs we used. Much of our
problem seems to center in our search for something to make us feel
whole. It is a tremendous struggle to stop relying on our own rea-
soning and ask for help, especially given the self-centered nature of
our disease. However, we are becoming open-minded. In realizing
that we don't have all the answers, we begin to find some humility.
We may not grasp the full impact of what being humble means, but
our open-mindedness assures us that we have found and have
begun to demonstrate this valuable quality.

                                 Step Two                            17


    Our humility and open-mindedness make us teachable. We al-
low others to share what has worked for them. This takes humility,
for we must let go of our fears about how we may appear to others.
Some of the strongest suggestions we may receive from other ad-
dicts are to attend meetings, ask for help, pray, and work the steps.
Our experience has shown us that belief in a Higher Power leads us
toward recovery in Narcotics Anonymous. People tend to live what
they believe, and our newfound belief calls on us to live the program.
No matter what we choose for our personal Higher Power, we've come
to believe that NA works. We live what we believe by continuing on
our path of recovery and working the Twelve Steps to the best of our
ability.
    Even after years clean, when we have been working a program of
recovery and seeking change, we may at times experience periods
when life seems meaningless. We may experience a sense of alien-
ation too painful to ignore. At such times, we may find ourselves
moving away from sanity, not toward it. We may begin to question
our commitment to recovery. We can become obsessed with self-
destructive thoughts. We may feel an urge to fall back on what seems
easier: the familiar ways of our addiction. During these times, we need
to renew our commitment to recovery. We trust that we are under-
going a fundamental transformation, even though we may not yet
understand its full implication for our lives. As painful as it seems,
we must change. If we trust that there is growth despite the pain,
we can walk through these difficult periods more readily.
    During these times, relying on the Second Step provides us with
hope and reminds us that we are not alone. If things don't feel right,
we take time to think and seek suggestions from our sponsor. We
trust that, with help from other recovering addicts and a Power greater
than ourselves, we can be restored to sanity in all areas of our lives.
We draw upon what we have learned from going to meetings and fol-
lowing directions. We accept that life on life's terms may not always

18                             It Works


be to our liking or, more importantly, to our understanding. Sanity
often means that we don't act on our first impulse. We begin to make
choices that help us rather than harm us. What worked for us in the
beginning remains applicable, no matter how many years we have
been clean. Once again, we reapply ourselves to the basics of this
program: going to meetings, reaching out for help, and working the
steps. Although we may feel despair, there is hope; a Power greater
than ourselves is always available to us.
   Along with the hope we derive from working Step Two, we find
that our way of thinking is undergoing a radical change. The whole
world looks different. Where before we had no reason to hope, we
now have every reason to expect a dramatic difference in our lives.
By being open-minded, we've opened ourselves to new ideas. We've
stepped away from the problem and toward a spiritual solution.
   This solution is evidenced by our open-mindedness and our will-
ingness to believe in a Power greater than ourselves. We must now
go on to Step Three to develop a relationship with the God of our
understanding.

                                  Step Three                           19


                          STEP THREE

              "We made a decision to turn our will and our lives
             over to the care of God as we understood Him."

    The surrender we experience in Step One, coupled with the hope
and belief we find in Step Two, make us ready and willing to continue on
the path toward freedom in Narcotics Anonymous. In Step Three, we
put our belief in a Higher Power into action, making a decision to turn
our will and our lives over to the care of the God of our understanding.
    Essential to working the Third Step is our willingness to allow the
God of our understanding to work in our lives. We develop this will-
ingness over time. The willingness we experience in our early recov-
ery is valuable even though we may be willing only to a certain degree.
Although this may feel like unconditional willingness, many of us have
discovered that our willingness grew as we learned to trust a Power
greater than ourselves.
    The decision we make in Step Three requires that we move away
from our self-will. Self-will is composed of such characteristics as
closed-mindedness, unwillingness, self-centeredness, and outright
defiance. Our self-centered obsession and its accompanying insan-
ity have made our lives unmanageable. Acting on our self-will has
kept us trapped in a continuous cycle of fear and pain. We wore our-
selves out in fruitless attempts to control everyone and everything.
We couldn't just allow events to happen. We were always on the look-
out for ways we could force things to go as we wanted.
    When we first look at making the decision called for in this step,
we are likely to have questions, uncertainty, and even fear about what
we are being asked to do. We might wonder why we need to make a
decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of the God of
our understanding. Or we may wonder what will happen to us if we
place ourselves in God's care. We may fear that we won't be happy
with what our lives will be like after working this step.


                                      19

20                                It Works


    When we trust that there is growth in taking action despite our
fear or uncertainty, we are able to work Step Three. Even though we
do not know how our lives will change as we work this step, we can
learn to trust that our Higher Power will care for us better than we
could. The Third Step is our commitment to our own emotional,
physical, and spiritual well-being.
    What began in the Second Step as belief in a Higher Power can
become a fuller relationship with a God of our understanding in Step
Three. The decision that we make by working this step, and the re-
lationship that results, will revolutionize our existence.
    This decision is easier to make than to live by. We can easily lapse
into old behavior; it takes determination, time, and courage to change.
Because we're not perfect, we simply continue to reaffirm our deci-
sion on a regular basis and then do the very best we can to live by
it. Complete and unconditional surrender of our will and our lives is
an ideal we strive to fulfill. Although we don't become perfect, we
do make a profound change by working this step. We are making a
serious effort to live differently than we have in the past. From now
on, we are going to be practicing this decision, and the way we re-
late to the world around us can change radically as a result.
    In working Step Three, we begin to learn how to stop struggling.
We learn to let go and trust the God of our understanding. If we take
time to think and seek direction before acting, we no longer have to
run on our own self-centered will. Turning our will and our lives over
to the care of our Higher Power provides a solution to the problems
created by a life based in self-will, resentment, and control.
    The spiritual principles we are practicing will guide us, not just in
the Third Step but throughout our recovery. The first three steps pro-
vide us with the solid spiritual foundation we will need to work the
rest of the steps. We keep our initial surrender alive by actively prac-
ticing the faith and willingness required to work the Third Step. In
other words, we've admitted our powerlessness and inability to manage

                                 Step Three                           21


our own lives; we've come to believe; now we need to surrender to
the care of the God of our understanding.
    We may find the willingness to work the Third Step by remember-
ing where we came from and believing that where we are going is cer-
tain to be quite different. Though we don't know what this
"difference" will entail, we know that it is sure to be better than what
we've had in the past. We rely on our faith and believe that this de-
cision is one of the best decisions we've ever made.
    Turning our will and our lives over to the care of the God of our
understanding is a tremendous decision. We may very well wonder
exactly how we are supposed to put this decision into practice. Be-
cause our individual beliefs about a Power greater than ourselves vary,
there is no uniform way to put our decision into action. However,
we have found some ways we all can use to find a personal under-
standing of the Third Step. One is to continue our efforts to develop
a personal relationship with a God of our understanding. Another is
to give up our efforts at controlling everything around us. We relax
our grip on the burdens we've been carrying and turn them over to
the care of a Higher Power. Yet another way we can practice our Third
Step decision is to continue with our recovery by working the remain-
der of the steps. Our sponsor will guide us in applying the spiritual
principles of recovery, showing us how to shift our focus away from
our own self-interest and toward a more spiritually centered life.
    As we get ready to make this decision, we talk with our sponsor,
go to step meetings, and take the opportunity to share about it with
other NA members. We gather as much knowledge, insight, and ex-
perience as we can from these sources, and then we make our own
decision. No one can do it for us; we must consciously decide to
do this for ourselves. Of course, this is not a decision we make solely
with our intellect. In truth, this is a choice we make with our hearts,
a decision based much more in feeling and desire than in deliberate
reasoning. Though the path from mind to heart seems a difficult one,

22                                It Works


formally working this step with our sponsor seems to help us make
this decision a part of who we are.
    The search for a God of our own understanding is one of the most
important efforts we will undertake in our recovery. We have com-
plete personal choice and freedom in how we understand our Higher
Power. We can each find a Higher Power that does for us what we
cannot do for ourselves. Because we are powerless over our addic-
tion, we need a Power greater than ourselves to help us.
    Just as our freedom to have a God of our own understanding is
unlimited, so is our freedom to communicate with our Higher Power
in whatever ways work for us. Anytime we communicate with our
Higher Power, whether it's simply with our thoughts or aloud at the
close of a meeting, we are praying. Most of us ask our Higher Power
for direction on a daily basis.
    Our relationship with our Higher Power grows stronger as we prac-
tice faith. In our experience, talking to a Power greater than ourselves
works. When we are having trouble in a particular area of our lives
or when we feel unable to stay clean, our Higher Power can help; we
only need to ask. With our prayers, we ask a Power greater than our-
selves to care for us. Each time we take this action, we strengthen
our faith and our decision to rely on our Higher Power.
    Step Three doesn't free us from having to take action, but it does
liberate us from excessive worry about the results. If we want some-
thing--a job, an education, recovery--we have to make the effort to
get it. Our Higher Power will take care of our spiritual needs, but we
need to participate in our own lives; we can't simply sit back and ex-
pect God to do everything. We are responsible for our recovery.
    Our lives are meant to be lived. No matter how sincere our ef-
forts at "turning it over," we will make mistakes, wander off course,
and experience moments of doubt. However, with each setback we
are given a new opportunity to renew our commitment to live by spiri-
tual principles. Part of the process of surrendering to God's will is to

                                 Step Three                            23


surrender to spiritual principles such as honesty, open-mindedness,
willingness, trust, and faith. We try to align our actions with what we
believe our Higher Power would want for us, and then we deal with
life as it happens.
     We may hesitate to work Step Three in all areas of our lives, es-
pecially in matters we want to control. Our experience has been that
we tend to hold on to certain areas. Perhaps we think, "I can con-
trol my finances just fine" or "My relationship is working; why do I
need to turn that over to the care of my Higher Power?" Working
Step Three only in certain areas of our lives short-circuits our spiri-
tual development. We have found that our recovery benefits when
we practice the principle of surrender, to the best of our ability, in all
areas of our lives. We strive to work this step thoroughly.
     We begin to see positive results from the decision we have made.
We begin to notice changes. While the circumstances of our lives
may not change, the way we deal with those circumstances does.
Because we have made the decision to allow spiritual principles to
work in our lives, we may notice a sense of relief. We are being re-
lieved of a burden we've carried far too long: the need to control ev-
erything and everyone. We begin to react differently to the situations
and people around us. As we gain acceptance, we cease to struggle
against life on life's terms. Striving to maintain and build on our sur-
render, we are better able to live and enjoy life in the moment.
     For some of us, deciding to turn our will and lives over to the care
of the God of our understanding is a process, not an event. How-
ever, in making that decision, we do make a commitment to practice
this step in our lives. When we are tempted to manipulate a situa-
tion, we recall this decision and let go. When we catch ourselves at-
tempting to exert control over someone or something, we stop and
instead ask a loving God to help us work this step.
     Relinquishing control is not easy, but we can do it with help. With
guidance from our sponsor and daily practice, we are sure to find our-

24                               It Works


selves learning how to get our egos out of the way so our Higher
Power can work in our lives. Each time we are fearful over a situa-
tion, we can turn to this step and find the means to walk through
our fear without resorting to our old ways.
    Recovery doesn't exempt us from having to live through painful
situations. At some point in our lives, we may have to mourn the
death of a loved one or deal with the end of a relationship. When
such things happen to us, we hurt, and no amount of spiritual aware-
ness will take our pain away. We do find, however, that the caring
presence of a loving Power greater than ourselves will help us get
through our pain clean. We may find that we are able to feel our
Higher Power's presence in the group, in our friends, or in talking to
our sponsor. By tapping into that Power, we begin to trust and rely
on it. We can cease questioning why painful things happen and trust
that walking through the difficult times in our lives can strengthen our
recovery. We can grow in spite of our pain or, perhaps, in response to it.
    Recovery is a process of discovery. We learn about ourselves, and
we learn how to cope with the world around us. When we are sin-
cere in our desire to allow our Higher Power to care for us, we begin
to gain a sense of serenity. We notice a gradual change in our think-
ing. Our attitudes and ideas become more positive. Our world is no
longer as distorted by self-pity, denial, and resentment. We are be-
ginning to replace those old attitudes with honesty, faith, and respon-
sibility; as a result, we begin to see our world in a better light. Our
lives are guided by our emerging integrity. Even though we make mis-
takes, we become more willing to take responsibility for our actions.
We learn that we don't have to be perfect to live a spiritual life. When
we work Step Three with an open mind and heart, we find the results
are far beyond our expectations.
    As we experience this new way of life, we begin to realize that
recovery is a priceless gift. We learn to trust; as we do, we open the
doors to intimacy and develop new relationships. Where once we

                                 Step Three                           25


focused only on not using, we now can appreciate the many things
that make our lives so valuable. We savor the laughter and the joy
we hear expressed so abundantly in our meetings. As recovery be-
comes more central in our lives and we internalize the principles em-
bodied in the steps, our view of the world changes profoundly. As
our awareness grows, so does our appreciation and faith in our Higher
Power.
    If we pause to reflect on our lives at this stage of our recovery,
we will see that we have experienced dramatic personal growth. The
relief we experience as a result of working the first three steps is only
a glimpse of the growth we can experience through working the Twelve
Steps.
    The role of the Third Step expands in our lives as we continue
working the other steps. Step Eleven asks us to pray for the knowl-
edge of God's will for us and the power to carry it out. Step Three
begins this process; it is here that we start to seek God's will for us.
Moving from a self-seeking life to a life based on spiritual principles
requires us to change profoundly.
    With the help of a loving God, we are ready to move forward on
our journey. This is a twelve-step program, not a three-step program.
The decision we've made in the Third Step is perhaps the most mo-
mentous decision we'll ever make in our lives, but we need to work
the rest of the steps for it to remain meaningful. There is more work
to do. We have found that the spiritual path set forth in the Twelve
Steps is the only way to recovery in Narcotics Anonymous. Putting
our recovery commitment into action, we work Step Four.

26                                It Works


                          STEP FOUR

       "We made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves."

    By working the first three steps, we have formed a solid founda-
tion for our recovery. Our active addiction cannot remain arrested,
however, unless we build upon this foundation. As we worked the
Third Step, many of us were puzzled: How can we make sure we are
really turning our will and lives over to the care of God? The answer
is simple: We work the remainder of the steps, starting with Step Four.
    Why work the Fourth Step? After all, we've been able to stay clean
so far. But some of us are still haunted by a driving obsession to
use drugs. Others find that the feelings of discomfort are more subtle:
a nagging feeling that something isn't quite right, a sense of impending
doom, or feelings of fear and anger that have no apparent reason.
Still others may think we're doing just fine without a Fourth Step.
However, our experience as a fellowship has shown that, sooner or
later, members who don't work this crucial step relapse.
    For many of us, our motivation to work the Fourth Step is quite
simple: We're working a program of recovery and we want to con-
tinue. Because our disease involves much more than our drug use,
recovery involves more than simple abstinence from drugs. The so-
lution to our problem is a profound change in our thinking and our
behavior. We need to change how we perceive the world and alter
our role in it. We need to change our attitude. Whether our motiva-
tion is a desire to move away from our addiction or to move toward
recovery doesn't really matter.
    The Fourth Step is a turning point in our journey of recovery. It is
a time for deep personal reflection. The confusion that we attempted
to mask with self-deception and drugs is about to diminish. We are em-
barking on a search for insight into ourselves, our feelings, our fears, our
resentments, and the patterns of behavior that make up our lives.



                                     26

                                   Step Four                             27


    We may be very frightened at the prospect of examining ourselves
so thoroughly. We don't know ourselves very well, and we may not
be sure we want to. Our fear of the unknown may seem overwhelm-
ing at this point, but if we recall our faith and trust in our Higher Power,
our fear can be overcome. We believe that part of God's will for us
is to work the steps. We trust that the final outcome of working the
Fourth Step will be the continued healing of our spirits, and we go on.
    The principles of recovery that we have already begun to prac-
tice are vital to working the Fourth Step. The honest acceptance of
our addiction, brought with us from Step One, will help us to be hon-
est about other aspects of our addiction. We've developed a level
of trust and faith in a Power greater than ourselves, and that glim-
mer of hope we've been feeling is growing with each day clean. We've
paved the way to recovery with our willingness, and we find the cour-
age necessary to work the Fourth Step through living these principles.
    Honesty is an essential part of this step. Our years of living a lie
must end. If we sit down and become very quiet with ourselves, we
will find it easier to get in touch with the truth. What we currently
know to be true, we put on paper, holding nothing back. Telling the
truth is a brave act, but with our faith and trust in the God of our
understanding, we find the courage we need to be searching and fear-
less. With our courage, we are able to put on paper those things we
thought we'd never tell.
    What is meant by a "searching and fearless moral inventory?" We
take stock of our assets and liabilities. We try to get at the bottom
of who we are, to expose the lies we have told ourselves about our-
selves. For years, we became whoever we needed to be to survive
our addiction. After living a lifetime of lies, we began to believe those
lies. Although we did discover some valuable truths in the First Step,
the Fourth Step further separates fantasy from reality. We can begin
to stop being the person we have invented and find the freedom to
be who we are.

28                               It Works


    If the word "moral" bothers us, we have found that talking with
our sponsor about our reservations can ease our discomfort. A moral
inventory doesn't mean that we will condemn ourselves. In reality,
the inventory process is one of the most loving things we can do for
ourselves. We simply look at our instincts, our desires, our motives,
our tendencies, and the compulsive routines that kept us trapped in
our addiction. No matter how many days or how many years we have
been clean, we are still human and subject to defects and failings.
An inventory allows us to look at our basic nature with its flaws and
its strengths. We look not only at our imperfections, but also at our
hopes, our dreams, our aspirations, and where they may have gone
astray. Step Four is a big step forward on the path of recovery.
    Some of us may want to write our inventory all at once; others
spend some time writing each day. Any time we sit down to write,
we ask our Higher Power for the courage and honesty we need to be
thorough and to reveal what we are searching for. In most cases, we
are relieved to find that once we begin, the words seem to flow natu-
rally. We need not worry about what we are writing. Our Higher Power
will reveal no more to us than we can handle.
    Most of us don't have much experience with the type of self-appraisal
we are about to do, and we must have the guidance and support of
our sponsor in order to understand what we're doing. Our sponsor
may give us a format to follow, certain subjects or points to concen-
trate on, or just general guidance. Not only can our sponsor pro-
vide direction for the actual inventory, he or she can encourage us
to be courageous, remind us to pray, and be emotionally supportive
throughout this process. We often strengthen our relationship with
our sponsor by relying on her or his experience at this time.
    Consistent action on our Fourth Step is important. We can't af-
ford to delay work on our inventory. Once we begin writing, we need
to continue our inventory until we are done. If we have a tendency
to procrastinate, it is a good idea to set aside a certain amount of

                                Step Four                             29


time each day to work on our inventory. Such a routine establishes
our inventory as a high priority in our lives. If we put our Fourth Step
away once we have begun, we run the risk of never returning to it.
    We are painstaking and detail-oriented in our inventory. We sys-
tematically examine all aspects of our lives. We begin to see and un-
derstand the truth about ourselves, our motives, and our patterns.
It is important that we look at more than one dimension of our ex-
perience. What motivated us to act the way we did? What repercus-
sions did our behavior have in our lives? How did our behavior affect
those around us? How did we harm others? How did we feel about
our actions and others' reactions? While these are only a few of the
points we address in our inventories, we have found them and other
issues like them to be essential areas to examine.
    In the Fourth Step, it is important to take a good hard look at
how fear has worked in our lives. Our experience tells us that self-
centered fear is at the root of our disease. Many of us have pre-
tended to be fearless when, in fact, we were terrified. Fear has driven
us to act rashly in trying to protect ourselves. We have often been
paralyzed into inaction because of our fears. We may have resorted
to scheming and manipulating because we feared the future. We went
to extremes to protect ourselves from what we saw as potential loss,
disaster, and a constant lack of what we needed. In the past, we had
no faith that a Higher Power would care for us; therefore, we at-
tempted to take control of our lives and everything around us. We
used people, we manipulated, we lied, we plotted, we planned, we
stole, we cheated, and then we lied some more to cover up our
schemes. We experienced envy, jealousy, and deep, gut-wrenching in-
securities. We were alone. As we drove away the people who cared
about us, we used more drugs, trying to cover up our feelings. The
lonelier we felt, the more we tried to control everything and every-
body. We suffered when things didn't go our way, but so strong was
our desire for power and control that we couldn't see the futility of

30                                It Works


our efforts to manage events. In our new lives, we have faith in a
loving God whose will for us is better than anything we could ma-
nipulate or control for ourselves. We need not fear what might happen.
    In our inventories, we assess the emotional effects of our addic-
tion. Some of us became so skilled at shutting down our feelings
with drugs or other distractions that, by the time we came to our first
meeting, we had lost touch with our own emotions. In recovery, we
learn to identify what we are feeling. Naming our feelings is impor-
tant, for once we do so, we can begin to deal with them. Rather than
panicking over how we feel, we can specifically say how we're feel-
ing. This gets us away from our limited way of identifying feelings as
either "good" or "bad" with not much in between.
    We make a list of our resentments, for they often play a large part
in making our recovery uncomfortable. We cannot allow ourselves
to be obsessed with hostility toward others. We look at the institu-
tions that may have affected us: our families, schools, employers, or-
ganized religion, the law, or jails. We list the people, places, social
values, institutions, and situations against which we bear anger. We
examine not only the circumstances surrounding these resentments,
but we look at the part we played in them. What in us was so threat-
ened that we experienced such deep emotional torment? Often, we
will see that the same areas of our lives were affected again and again.
    We look at our relationships as well, especially the manner in
which we related to our families. We don't do this to place blame
for our addiction on our families. We keep in mind that we are writ-
ing an inventory of ourselves, not of others. We write about how we
felt about our families and the way we acted on our feelings. In most
cases, we'll find that the patterns of behavior we established early in
life are what we've carried with us up to the present. Some of our
patterns and choices have served us well, while others have not.
Through the inventory, we search for the patterns we want to con-
tinue and those we want to change.

                                Step Four                            31


    Writing about all of our relationships is very important, and we'll
want to pay particular attention to our friendships. If we gloss over
examining our platonic friendships in favor of focusing on romantic
relationships, our inventories will be incomplete. Many of us come
to NA never having had a long-term friendship because of conflicts
within ourselves. Those conflicts were the real grounds for the argu-
ments we started with our friends and our ensuing refusal to work
through the disagreement and continue the friendship. Some of us
felt that we would end up getting hurt in any close friendship, so be-
fore that happened, we arranged the end of the friendship ourselves.
We may have feared intimacy to such a degree that we never revealed
anything about ourselves to our friends. We may have induced guilt
in our friends to ensure their loyalty or indulged in other forms of
emotional blackmail. If our friends had others in their lives, we may
have felt so jealous and insecure that we tried to remove the threat
of their other friends. Our behavior ranged from taking our friends
hostage to taking them for granted. We may find several instances
where we sacrificed our friendships for romantic relationships.
    We will probably find identical conflicts and behaviors in our ro-
mantic relationships. We'll see the same difficulties with trust, re-
fusal to be vulnerable, and perhaps a lifelong pattern of inability to
make commitments. As we write, we'll most likely see fear of inti-
macy in each relationship or discover that we've never understood
the difference between intimacy and sex. Whether we ran from close
relationships because of fear or because we had been hurt over and
over again, we search out the common threads that appear in all of
our relationships.
    We may find that our sexual beliefs and behavior have caused
problems in our relationships. We may have settled for sex when we
really wanted love. We may have used sex to get something we
wanted or believed that, by having sex, we could extract a commit-
ment from an unwilling partner. We ask ourselves if our sexual behavior

32                                  It Works


has been based in selfishness or in love. We may have used sex to
fill the spiritual void we felt inside. Some of us felt shame as a result
of our sexual practices. After years of compulsively acting on our
fears and misguided beliefs about sex, we want to be at peace with
our own sexuality. This is a very uncomfortable topic for most of us.
However, if we want something different than what we've had, it's nec-
essary that we begin the process of change by writing about it.
     Some of us were abused. We may have been victims of incest or
rape. We may have had terrible childhoods of deprivation and ne-
glect. Experiences like these may have led us to inflict the same abuse
on others. We may have prostituted ourselves or allowed other forms
of degradation because we didn't feel that we deserved anything bet-
ter. Though painful and sad, the past cannot be changed. However,
the warped beliefs we have developed about ourselves and others can
be changed with the help of our Higher Power. We write about events
like these so that we can be free of our most painful secrets and get on
with our lives. We don't have to be the lifelong victims of our past.
     To experience serenity, we must begin to alter the self-defeating
patterns that have prevailed in our lives. The Fourth Step helps us
identify those patterns. We begin to see how we have maneuvered
through life, perhaps not consciously planning our own misery but
making choices which resulted in our lives becoming unmanageable.
Most of us have blamed various people for the prices we paid for
our addiction. We didn't want to accept that our addiction had a
negative impact that we alone were responsible for. Some of us com-
mitted crimes and then complained about the consequences. Some
of us were irresponsible at work and then objected loudly when we
were held accountable. We beat a hasty retreat whenever life caught
up with us. Our inventories will help us identify our responsibility for
our actions and find those circumstances where we tend to place
blame elsewhere. Our booklet, Working Step Four in Narcotics Anony-
mous, can provide more avenues to explore.

                                 Step Four                            33


    The quality of our lives depends, to a large degree, on the results
of our decisions. As we write our inventory, we look for the times
when we made decisions that hurt us; we also look for those times
when we made decisions that worked out well. If we lived our lives
by default, refusing to make any choices, we write about that, too.
Those times when we procrastinated until opportunities were missed
and gone, the times when we abandoned all responsibility, the times
when we withdrew and refused to participate in life--all are inven-
tory material. Most of us had hopes and dreams for ourselves at
some point in our lives, but we abandoned those in the pursuit of
our addiction. In our inventory, we try to recall our lost dreams and
find out how our choices had ruined our chances of having those
dreams come true. We ask ourselves when we stopped believing in
ourselves and when we stopped believing in anything outside our-
selves. Through this process, our lost dreams may reawaken.
    We dig deep to learn how we lived in conflict with our own mor-
als and values. If we believed it was wrong to steal and we were steal-
ing everything we could get our hands on anyway, what did we do to
quiet our anguish? If we believed in monogamy but were unfaithful
to our partners, what did we do so that we could live with our com-
promised principles? Certainly we used more drugs, but what else?
We explore how we felt about ignoring our deepest beliefs. In the
process, we discover our lost values so that we can begin to rebuild
them.
    In our inventories, we will need to be aware of our assets. With
most of us being unaccustomed to looking for our character
strengths, we might have some trouble with this task. But if we ex-
amine our behavior with an open mind, we're sure to find situations
where we persevered in the face of adversity, showed concern for oth-
ers, or even where our spirit triumphed over our addiction. We begin
to uncover the pure and loving spirit that lies at the core of our being
as we look for our character assets. We begin to define our values. We

34                                It Works


learn what we can do and, more importantly, what we can't do if we
want to lead productive and fulfilling lives. What we did in our active
addiction will not work for us in recovery. Step Four allows us to chart
a new course for our lives.
    The Fourth Step provides us with the initial insight we need to
grow. Whether we are writing our first inventory or our twentieth, we
are starting a process that takes us from confusion to clarity, from
resentment to forgiveness, from spiritual confinement to spiritual free-
dom. We can turn to this process again and again. When we are
confused, when we are angry, when we have problems that don't seem
to disappear, an inventory is a good way to take stock of just where
we stand on the path to recovery. After we have written a number of
inventories, we may discover that our first Fourth Step merely
scratched the surface. As different attitudes and behaviors become
apparent to us in later recovery, we'll want to renew the process of
change by working the Fourth Step again.
    The steps are tools we use over and over on our spiritual path.
In the process of our recovery, God will reveal more to us as we have
the maturity and the spiritual strength to understand it. Over time,
the nature of the work we have to do is disclosed to us. As we con-
tinue in recovery, we begin to resolve some of the basic conflicts con-
tributing to our addiction. As the pain of old wounds begins to fade,
we begin to live more fully in the present.
    The Fourth Step allows us to identify the patterns, behaviors, and
beliefs that show us the exact nature of our wrongs. We have writ-
ten an inventory of ourselves which has revealed what we can change
with God's help. To continue the process of change, we move on,
making our admissions in Step Five.

                                  Step Five                            35


                             STEP FIVE

                     "We admitted to God, to ourselves,
         and to another human being the exact nature of our wrongs."

    Now that we have completed our written inventory, it is essential
that we share it promptly. The sooner we work our Fifth Step, the
stronger the foundation of our recovery will be. We've built this foun-
dation on spiritual principles such as surrender, honesty, trust, faith,
willingness, and courage; with each step forward in our recovery, we
strengthen our commitment to these principles. We reaffirm our com-
mitment to recovery by immediately working Step Five.
    Despite our desire to recover, we may find that we're feeling fright-
ened at this point. This fear is only natural. After all, we're about to
confront the exact nature of our wrongs, candidly admitting our se-
crets to God, to ourselves, and to another human being. If we allow
our feelings of shame or our fears of change and rejection to stop
our progress, our problems will only be compounded. If we stop mov-
ing forward in our recovery, if we cease making every possible effort
to recover, we will have given in to the disease of addiction.
    We must overcome our fear and work the Fifth Step if we are to
make any significant changes in the way we live. We gather our cour-
age and go on. We may call our sponsor for reassurance. Usually, a
reminder that we don't have to face our feelings alone makes all the
difference in easing our fears. Working this step with the support of
our sponsor and a loving God is a way of putting into practice our
decision to allow God to care for our will and our lives. That deci-
sion, like most decisions we make, must be followed with action. Fol-
lowing our Third Step decision with the action of the Fourth and Fifth
Steps will lead to a closer relationship with our Higher Power.
    Our understanding of the spiritual principles we have practiced
in the first four steps will be enhanced by working the Fifth Step. We



                                    35

36                               It Works


experience honesty by making an admission, just as we did in Step
One, but we experience it on a deeper level. The admission we are
about to make to ourselves in Step Five is especially important. Not
only do we open up and tell the truth about ourselves, we also hear
this admission from our own lips, breaking the pattern of denial that
has plagued us for so long. We find new levels of honesty, especially
self-honesty, when we squarely face the results of our addiction and
see the reality of our lives. The risks we take in this step increase
our trust in God and nourish the faith and hope we first experienced
in Step Two. We take our willingness a step further, thereby renewing
the decision we made in Step Three. We draw on the courage we
acquired in Step Four and find that we are far more brave than we
ever dreamed possible. This bravery is demonstrated not by our lack
of fear but by the action we take in spite of our fear. We set a time
to share our inventory, then we show up and share at the scheduled
time.
    Another action which requires courage is our admission to our-
selves. We need to focus particular attention on this aspect of the
Fifth Step. If we don't, we may find the benefits we derive from this
step are not as meaningful as they could have been. As our Basic
Text states, "Step Five is not simply a reading of Step Four." We want
to make sure we are acknowledging and accepting the exact nature
of our wrongs. We can even formalize this admission to ourselves if
we think it will help. However, the manner in which we make this
admission to ourselves is not as important as the action itself.
    We gain a new understanding of the principle of humility as we
work this step. We've most likely been under the impression that we
were somehow bigger or more visible than other people. Through
working the Fifth Step, we find that few of our actions deserve exag-
gerated attention. Through our self-disclosure, we feel connected with
humanity, perhaps for the first time in our lives.

                                Step Five                           37


    As we share our most personal feelings and our most carefully
guarded secrets, we may experience anguish. However, many of us
have looked up and seen unconditional love in the eyes of the per-
son hearing our Fifth Step. The feelings of acceptance and belong-
ing we experienced at that moment helped us to feel a part of the
program.
    The knowledge that we are about to face feelings we have long
avoided may cause a rise in our anxiety level, but we go on, encour-
aged by our sponsor to trust the God of our understanding. The first
thing we must realize is that the Fifth Step is not a quick fix for a
painful situation. If we work this step expecting our feelings to go
away, we are expecting the steps to numb us the way drugs did. We
review our first four steps and see that their purpose is to awaken
our spirits, not deaden our feelings. We will need support and un-
derstanding to cope with our feelings. If we choose an understand-
ing individual to make our admissions to, we will have all the support
we need.
    Although there is no requirement that the listener must be our
sponsor, most of us choose to share our inventory with him or her.
By doing so, we are most likely to benefit from the full range of ex-
perience another recovering addict has to share. After all, who can
better understand what we are attempting than those who have done
it for themselves? Addicts more experienced in recovery than we are
will already have dealt with the matters we are just beginning to face.
Such people can share with us their experience and the solutions they
have found through working this step. The bond we share with our
sponsor will strengthen our connection with the program and increase
our sense of belonging.
    The person who listens to our Fifth Step should be someone who
understands the process of recovery we are involved in and some-
one who is willing to help us through it. We have found that an ideal
listener will have enough compassion to honor our feelings, enough

38                               It Works


integrity to respect our confidences, and enough insight to help us
keep the exact nature of our wrongs within our field of vision. Know-
ing that we are sharing our inventory, she or he will help us to avoid
getting sidetracked by blaming others for the things we've written
about in our Fourth Step.
     Although we know we are going to derive meaningful benefits from
working this step, we may still need to take a moment to reaffirm
our surrender and the decision we made in the Third Step. We can
ask a Power greater than ourselves for the honesty, courage, and will-
ingness to work this step. To invite God into this process, we may
want to say a prayer. The prayer can be anything that reaffirms our
commitment to recovery. Praying with the person hearing our Fifth
Step can be a profoundly intimate experience.
     Not only do we pray to ask for strength and courage, many of us
also ask our Higher Power to listen as we make our admission. Why
is it so important that we also make our admission to God? Because
this is a spiritual program, and our whole purpose is to awaken spiri-
tually. Our willingness to approach our Higher Power openly with our
past and who we are is central to our recovery. In the past, some of
us felt that we weren't worthy of a relationship with God. Our se-
crets blocked our ability to feel any acceptance or love from that
Power. When we reveal something about ourselves, we draw closer
to our Higher Power and experience the unconditional love and ac-
ceptance which springs from that Power. The feeling that the God of
our understanding accepts us, no matter what we've done, enhances
our acceptance of ourselves. The positive relationship we are build-
ing with a Higher Power carries over into our relationships with oth-
ers as well.
     We may be surprised by the intensity of the partnership we are
developing with our sponsor as we share our inventory. If we've never
really been listened to before, we may be startled to discover that
we are being asked questions about some fine point of our personal

                                Step Five                           39


history or that our sponsor is jotting down notes while we share.
Our self-esteem increases as we realize that what we have to share
is worth such close attention. We may see deep compassion in our
listener's eyes, showing us that our pain is understood. That com-
passion is one more assurance of the presence of a Power greater than
ourselves.
    Looking at and sharing the exact nature of our wrongs is not likely
to be a comfortable activity. We have looked back and seen how re-
peating the same patterns over and over again has kept us stuck in
the same place. And we haven't just seen the surface behavior; we've
seen the defects of character that have been behind our behavior all
along. We start to realize that there is a difference between our ac-
tions and the exact nature of our wrongs. For instance, we may see
example after example of situations where we lied in a vain attempt
to make everyone like us. But those examples aren't the nature of
our wrongs. The nature of these wrongs is the dishonesty and ma-
nipulation we were demonstrating each time we lied. If we look be-
yond the dishonesty and manipulation, we'll most likely find that we
were afraid no one would like us if we told the truth.
    As we share our inventory, our sponsor will sometimes share some
of his or her own experience with us. Our sponsor may cry with us
or smile in recognition at some of the struggles we are now sharing.
We may laugh together as we share some of the more comical as-
pects of our addiction and the ridiculous lies we told ourselves so
that we could continue to live as we were living. As we see how similar
our feelings are to our sponsor's feelings, we realize that there are
other people like us. We're human beings, nothing more, nothing less.
Our self-obsession blinded us to this, making us feel unique. Sud-
denly we understand that other people, too, have painful problems
and that ours are no more significant than anyone else's. Healing
can take place when we see a glimpse of ourselves in the eyes of an-
other. We find humility in that moment and a reason to hope that

40                               It Works


the serenity and peace we have been striving for are within our reach
at last.
    Our feelings of alienation fade as we experience an emotional con-
nection with another human being. We are allowing someone entry
to those places we've never before opened to another person. This
may be the first time we've ever trusted another person enough to
tell her or him about ourselves and allow that person to get to know
us. We may be surprised at the closeness that develops between us
and our sponsor. We're developing a give-and-take relationship based
on equality and mutual respect, the kind that can last for a lifetime.
    After working our Fifth Step, we may feel a little raw or emotion-
ally vulnerable. We've taken a major step in the healing process of
recovery. This process could be thought of as "surgery of the spirit."
We've opened up old wounds. We've exposed our most carefully con-
structed lies for the deceptions they were, and we've told ourselves
some painful truths. We've dropped our masks in the presence of
another person.
    At this point, we may experience a dangerous urge to run from
our new awareness and return to the familiar misery of the past. We
may feel tempted to avoid our sponsor because he or she knows all
about us now. It is very important that we resist such impulses. We
must talk with other recovering addicts about our fears and feelings
so we can hear the experience they have to share. We'll find that
what we're going through is not unique and feel relieved when oth-
ers tell us they went through the very same struggles after they worked
their Fifth Step.
    Our awareness of our patterns of relating with others and the risk
we have just taken in admitting them to another bring about a mo-
mentous breakthrough in our relationships. Not only do we form a
close bond with our sponsor, but the risk we take in trusting this per-
son will help us develop close relationships with others as well. We've
risked trusting one person with our secrets and our feelings, and we

                                  Step Five                           41


haven't been rejected. We begin to have the freedom to trust oth-
ers. Not only do we find out that others are trustworthy and deserve
our friendship, we find that we are also trustworthy and deserving.
We may have thought we were incapable of loving or being loved or
ever having friends. We discover that these beliefs were unfounded.
We learn, from the example of our sponsor, how to be a more caring
friend.
    Our relationships begin to change after this step, including the
one we have with the God of our understanding. Throughout the pro-
cess of the Fifth Step, we turned to that Power when we were fearful,
and we received the courage we needed to complete the step. Our
belief and our faith grew as a result. Because of this, we're willing to
put more of ourselves into building a relationship with God. Just like
any other relationship, the one we develop with our Higher Power calls
for openness and trust on our part. When we share our most per-
sonal thoughts and feelings with our Higher Power, letting down our
walls and admitting we are less than perfect, intimacy develops. We
develop a certainty that our Higher Power is always with us and that
we are being cared for.
    The process we have undertaken so far has made us aware of the
exact nature of our wrongs. The exact nature of those wrongs is our
character defects. We now know that the patterns of our lives were
rooted in dishonesty, fear, selfishness, and many other defects of char-
acter. We've seen the whole spectrum of our defects and are ready
for something new. With this readiness, we move on to Step Six.

42                                 It Works


                              STEP SIX

   "We were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character."

    The insight we gained in Step Five regarding the exact nature of
our wrongs, while valuable, is only the beginning of the striking
changes that take place in our lives as we move on to Step Six. The
admission we made of the nature of our wrongs, our character de-
fects, is necessary if we are to be ready to have them removed.
Deeply shaken by our part in the past, we can expect our attitudes
to be profoundly changed by working the Sixth Step.
    Although some of us have not understood the critical importance
of the Sixth and Seventh Steps, they are essential actions that must
be taken if we expect to make any significant and lasting changes in
our lives. We cannot simply say, "Yes, I'm ready. God, please remove
my defects," and go on to Step Eight. If we gloss over the Sixth and
Seventh Steps and go on to make our amends, we will only wind up
owing more amends by repeating the same destructive patterns as
before.
    The lifelong process of the Sixth Step is just that--a process.
We've started the process of becoming entirely ready, and we will strive
to increase our readiness throughout our lifetime. Our job is to be-
come entirely ready and to open our hearts and minds to the deep
internal changes that can only be brought about by the presence of
a loving God.
    We've already had experience in the Third Step with what we must
do now in the Sixth Step. Just as we surrendered our will and lives
to the care of a Power greater than ourselves because we could no
longer go on managing our own lives, we now prepare to surrender
our defects of character to a loving God because we have exhausted
our attempts to change on our own willpower. This process is diffi-
cult and often painful.



                                      42

                                  Step Six                           43


    Our growing awareness of our defects often causes us pain. We've
all heard the expression "ignorance is bliss," but we are no longer
ignorant of our character defects, and this awareness hurts. All of a
sudden, we'll notice a wounded look in the eyes of a friend after we've
acted on one of our less endearing traits. We'll hang our heads in
shame, mumble an apology, and probably beat ourselves inwardly for
being so callous one more time. We feel sick inside, knowing how
our actions adversely affect the people in our lives. We are sick and
tired of being the people we have been, but this feeling compels us
to change and grow. We want to be different than we have been in
the past, and the good news is that we already are. Being able to
see beyond our own interests and being concerned about the feel-
ings of others are striking changes, considering that our raging self-
obsession is at the core of our disease.
    We are likely to feel very frustrated as we notice that our defects
are getting in the way of our recovery. We may attempt to suppress
them ourselves by either denying their existence or hiding them from
others. We may think that if no one knows about them, our more
unattractive characteristics will go away. What we must do, rather
than try to exert power and control over our defects, is step out of
the way and allow a loving God to work in our lives. One part of this
process involves becoming responsible for our behavior.
    When we are confronted with our character defects, either by our
own insight or by someone we have hurt, we begin by taking com-
plete responsibility for our actions. We don't avoid responsibility by
saying something like, "Well, God hasn't removed that defect yet" or
"I'm powerless over my defects, and that's just the way I'm going to
be." We accept responsibility for our behavior--good, bad, or indif-
ferent. We no longer have our drug use or our ignorance as an ex-
cuse to be irresponsible.
    When we honestly admit our wrongs, we find humility. The humility
we experienced in Step Five grows as we again sense our humanness

44                               It Works


and realize that we are never going to be perfect. We accept our-
selves a little bit more, we surrender, and our willingness to change
increases dramatically. We have already experienced remarkable
changes in our emotional and spiritual nature through our continu-
ous efforts to live by the principles contained in the previous steps.
Despite our lack of familiarity with the realm of the spirit, we must
remember that, in Steps One through Three, we were given the basic
tools we need to negotiate the path of recovery. We carry within us
the honesty it took to make our initial surrender, the faith and hope
we developed in coming to believe in a Power greater than ourselves,
and the trust and willingness required from us when we made our
decision to turn our will and lives over to the care of God. Our hearts
were touched by the humility of believing in that Power.
    On this spiritual foundation we lay the principles of commitment
and perseverance as we work the Sixth Step. We need the willing-
ness to make a commitment to pursue our recovery despite the con-
tinued presence of character defects in our lives. We mustn't give
up, even when we think no change has taken place. We are often
blind to our own internal changes, but we can rest assured that what's
happening inside us is evident on the outside to others. Our job is
to keep on walking, even though it may feel as though each step re-
quires more strength than we can muster. No matter how difficult
our progress, we must persevere. We can make use of the sheer grit
and tenacity it took to maintain our active addiction by being stead-
fast and strong in our efforts to sustain our recovery.
    Having written our inventory and shared it with ourselves, the God
of our understanding, and another human being, we've become aware
of our defects of character. With the help of our sponsor, we write a
list of those defects and focus on how they manifest themselves in
our lives. Our character defects are basic human traits that have been
distorted out of proportion by our self-centeredness, causing enor-
mous pain to us and those around us.

                                  Step Six                          45


    Take a defect such as self-righteousness, for example, and imag-
ine it in its normal, uninflated state--confident belief in one's own
values. Strong, confident, and well-rounded people have formed val-
ues and principles to live by and believe deeply in their rightness.
Such people live what they believe and share those beliefs with oth-
ers in a non-critical way when asked. Confidence in our beliefs is
essential. Without it, we would be wishy-washy, unsure of our deci-
sions, and probably somewhat immature in our dealings with the
world. Confident belief becomes ugly self-righteousness when we in-
sist that others live by our values. Attempting to enforce our insis-
tence by manipulating or exploiting others makes this defect even
uglier.
    Or consider fear. The absence of fear in the face of a personal
attack, catastrophic illness, or potential injury would signal insanity
rather than serenity! We all have fears--of being alone, of not hav-
ing our physical needs met, of dying, and many others. But when
our fears become obsessively self-centered, when we spend all of our
time protecting ourselves from what might happen, we can no longer
deal effectively with life in the here and now.
    As we work Step Six, bridging the vast gulf that lies between fear
and courage requires a great deal of willingness and trust on our part.
Our fears of what we will be like without relying on the destructive
behavior of our past must be overcome. We will need to trust our
Higher Power to remove our defects of character. We must be willing
to take a chance that what lies beyond the Sixth Step is going to be
better than our current stock of fears, resentments, and spiritual an-
guish. When the pain of remaining the same becomes greater than
our fear of change, we will surely let go.
    We may wonder what will happen to us without the use of what
we may see as survival skills. After all, in our active addiction, our
self-centeredness protected us from feeling guilt and enabled us to
continue our drug use without regard for those around us. Our denial

46                                  It Works


protected us from seeing the wreckage of our lives. Our selfishness
made it possible for us to do whatever it took to continue in our insan-
ity. But we no longer need these "skills." We have a set of principles to
practice that are much more appropriate to our new way of life.
     As we write our list of defects and see how they have been at the
root of our troubles, we need to be open-minded about how our lives
would be without these defects. If one of our character defects is
dishonesty, we can think about situations in our lives where we nor-
mally lie and imagine how it would feel to tell the truth for a change.
If we put some effort into this exercise, we may feel a sense of relief
at the possibility of a life free from having to cover small deceits with
major fabrications and all the complications inherent in dishonesty.
Or, if we find defects based in laziness and procrastination, we can
visualize leaving behind our marginal existence and moving on to a
life of realized ambitions, new horizons, and unlimited possibilities.
     In addition to our hopes and dreams for the future, we might find
in our sponsor or others whose recovery we admire more concrete
examples of those assets for which we are striving. If we know mem-
bers who are exhibiting the spiritual assets we want to attain, we can
use them as an example for ourselves. What we hope to become is
evidenced all around us in recovering addicts living by spiritual prin-
ciples. Our sponsor and other members share the freedom they have
found from their defects of character, and we have faith that what
happened for them will also happen for us.
     Even so, we may still go through a period of mourning over the
loss of our illusions and old ways. Sometimes giving up those out-
dated survival skills feels like giving up our best friend. We do, how-
ever, need to surrender our reservations, excuses, rationalizations, and
self-deceptions and go forward into recovery with our eyes wide open.
We are completely aware that there's no turning back, because we can
never forget the miracle that's begun to happen to us. Our bruised and
battered spirits have started to heal in the course of working the steps.

                                 Step Six                                 47


    Part of the process of becoming entirely ready involves practic-
ing constructive behavior. Because we now understand and recog-
nize our destructive behaviors, we'll find the willingness to practice
constructive behaviors instead. For instance, if we're hurt somehow,
we don't have to curl up in a ball of self-pity, complaining about what
a rotten deal we got. Instead, we can accept what is and work to-
ward finding solutions. The more we do this, the more we form a
habit of thinking constructively. It becomes natural to begin exam-
ining alternatives, setting goals, and following through in the face of
adversity. We don't have to spend time sulking or pointlessly com-
plaining about circumstances beyond our control. We may even sur-
prise ourselves with our cheer and optimism at times, and it's no wonder,
considering how foreign such attitudes have been to most of us!
    There may still be times when we feel that entirely too much is
being asked of us. Many of us have exclaimed, "You mean I even
have to tell the truth about that?" or "If only I could still lie, steal, or
cheat, it would be so much easier to get what I want." We're torn
between the unprincipled ways of our addiction and the character-
building principles of recovery. While, at first glance, it may seem
easier to manipulate outcomes or avoid consequences, we know that
we cannot afford the price we would have to pay. The resulting shame,
regret, and loss of spiritual contentment would far outweigh anything
we might possibly gain by compromising our principles.
    Through upholding the principles of recovery, we seek a life of har-
mony and peace. The energy we once put into the care and feeding
of our character defects can now be put into nurturing our spiritual
goals. The more attention we focus on our spiritual nature, the more
it will unfold in our lives.
    We will not, however, achieve a state of spiritual perfection, re-
gardless of how diligently we apply the Sixth Step to our lives. We
will most likely see the defects we deal with today manifest them-
selves in a variety of ways throughout our lifetime. Even after years

48                               It Works


of recovery, we may feel devastated at the reappearance of some old
defect we thought had been removed. We are humbled by our im-
perfection--but let there be no mistake; humility is the ideal state
for an addict to be in. Humility brings us back down to earth and
plants our feet firmly on the spiritual path we are walking. We smile
at our delusions of perfection and keep on walking. We're on the
right path, headed in the right direction, and each step we take brings
progress.
    We gain more tolerance for the defects of those around us as we
work this step. When we see someone acting out on a defect that
we have acted on ourselves, we feel compassionate rather than judg-
mental, for we know just exactly how much pain such behavior causes.
Rather than condemning the behavior of another, we look at our-
selves. Having experience in accepting ourselves, we can extend com-
passion and tolerance to others.
    We ask ourselves if we are entirely ready to have God remove all
of our defects--every single one. If any reservation exists, if we feel
the need to cling to any defect, we pray for willingness. We open
our spirits to the healing we've found in Narcotics Anonymous and
use the resources of our recovery to do our best each moment. Al-
though the process lasts a lifetime, we only live in the present day.
We've taken a giant step forward in the process of recovery, but it
must be followed with another to be truly lasting. With the readi-
ness we have at hand today, we go on to Step Seven.

                               Step Seven                              49


                         STEP SEVEN

            "We humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings."

     In Step Four, we uncovered the basic defects of our character. In
Step Five, we admitted their existence. In Step Six, we became en-
tirely ready to have them removed so that we could experience con-
tinued spiritual growth and recovery. Now, in Step Seven, we humbly
ask our Higher Power to remove our shortcomings. When we ask our
Higher Power to remove these shortcomings, we ask for freedom from
anything which limits our recovery. We ask for help because we can-
not do it alone.
     Through working the previous steps, we see that attaining humil-
ity is necessary if we are going to live a clean life and walk a spiritual
path. An attitude of humility is not the same as humiliation, nor is it
a denial of our good qualities. On the contrary, an attitude of humil-
ity means that we have a realistic view of ourselves and our place in
the world. In the Seventh Step, humility means understanding our
role in our own recovery, appreciating our strengths and limitations,
and having faith in a Power greater than ourselves. To work the Sev-
enth Step, we must get out of the way so that God can do God's
work. Humbly asking for the removal of our shortcomings means we
are giving complete license to that loving Power to work in our lives,
believing that God's wisdom far exceeds our own.
     Even though we now possess some measure of humility, many of
us may be somewhat confused by the word "humbly." We may have
taken it for granted that God would remove our shortcomings imme-
diately upon request. Those of us with this attitude may have been
surprised when our Higher Power didn't comply with our request. On
the other hand, some of us tried pleading with God to remove our
shortcomings, guessing that would be a demonstration of humility.




                                   49

50                               It Works


    We tried so hard to get it right. We were tired of our shortcom-
ings. We were worn out from trying to manage and control them,
and we wanted some relief. Oddly enough, this is precisely the atti-
tude we hope to demonstrate in Step Seven, the attitude of humility.
We admit defeat, recognize our limitations, and ask for help from the
God of our understanding.
    Asking our Higher Power to remove our shortcomings requires a
surrender of a more pronounced nature than our initial surrender.
That surrender, born of sheer despair over our powerlessness and in-
ability to manage our lives, moves into an entirely new realm in the
Seventh Step. In this new level of surrender, we accept not only our
addiction but also the shortcomings related to our addiction. Ac-
cepting our addiction was the first move in the direction of accept-
ing ourselves. We know something about ourselves because of our
work in the previous steps, and our illusions of uniqueness have been
overcome in the process. We know that we are neither more nor less
important than anyone else. Understanding that we are not unique
is a good indication of humility.
    Patience is an essential ingredient of working this step. We may
have difficulty with the notion of patience because our addiction ac-
customed us to instant gratification. But we've already been prac-
ticing the principles that make it possible for us to be patient. We
simply need to expand on our Third Step decision to trust the God
of our understanding with our will and our lives. If we only trusted
that Power to a certain extent in Step Three, it's time to increase our
trust.
    Because our view of what we can hope for may be limited, many
of us can't even begin to imagine what our Higher Power has in store
for us. If this is the case for us, we must rely on faith. As in the
previous steps, we simply have to believe that God's will for us is
good. Our faith gives us reason to hope for the best.

                                 Step Seven                           51


    In working this step, we move away from intellectualizing the re-
covery process. Our concern is not to determine exactly how or when
our shortcomings will be removed. It's not our job to analyze this
step. This step is a spiritual choice, a choice that goes beyond any
emotional reaction or conscious act of will. To choose to bypass it
would leave us with only a heightened awareness of our character
defects and no hope for relief from those shortcomings. The result-
ing pain might well be unbearable.
    We've seen our character defects, our faulty belief systems, and
our unhealthy patterns of behavior. We've seen that we need to
change but may not be aware that we've been changing since we first
came to Narcotics Anonymous for help. We walked into our first
meeting with a spiritual void. Some essential ray of spiritual light had
been cut off. We had lost the ability to love, to laugh, and to feel.
For so long, people had looked into our eyes and had trouble seeing
the human being behind the blank gaze. From our very first meet-
ing, we sensed the love and acceptance of other NA members. We
began to come back to life. What we are experiencing is an awaken-
ing of the spirit--no less dramatic than it sounds. This awakening
has been evident to those around us for quite some time, but the
change is now so obvious that we can see it as well.
    One of the changes we see is in our relationship with the God of
our understanding. Previously, we may have felt that God was far re-
moved and did not have much to do with us on a personal level. We
may have had trouble grasping the fact that each one of us could
have a God of our understanding always available to us. Prayer may
have felt artificial for quite a while, but we may now sense that we
are being listened to and loved when we pray.
    Developing a relationship with the God of our understanding goes
a long way toward increasing our level of comfort when we ask to
have our shortcomings removed. The work we've done in the previ-
ous steps has enriched that relationship. We've asked our Higher

52                               It Works


Power for honesty, open-mindedness, and willingness, and we have
been provided with the ability to develop those attributes that are
so vital to our recovery.
    Each time we come up short on any of the qualities we are trying
to attain or when we have difficulty practicing spiritual principles, we
turn to the God of our understanding. In this step, we ask a loving
God to remove our impatience, our intolerance, our dishonesty, or
whatever shortcoming is currently in the way. We find that our Higher
Power always provides us with what we need, and our faith grows as
a result. When we ask our Higher Power to remove our shortcom-
ings, we may see little bits of some of them removed. Other defects
may simply be shoved out of the way for a time so that we can move
forward on the path of recovery. We may even attain complete free-
dom from having to act on those defects. The point is that we have
come to believe that only the God of our understanding has the power
to remove our shortcomings. We can actually ask our Higher Power
to remove our shortcomings in good faith, knowing that it will hap-
pen in God's time. This faith can transcend our own ideas of what
we need or think we should have.
    Regardless of how secure we feel in our relationship with the God
of our understanding, we need our sponsor to guide us through the
Seventh Step. Our sponsor helps us with our understanding of hu-
mility and in finding a comfortable way of communicating with our
Higher Power.
    We need to remember that we are praying to a Power greater than
ourselves. We ask humbly, knowing that we are powerless. Some of
us will recite a formal prayer that demonstrates humility when we ask
our Higher Power to help us. Some of us will pray in a more casual
manner, just as humbly, but using our own words. Any communica-
tion with our Higher Power is prayer. However we choose to com-
municate with the God of our understanding, we feel a certain comfort
come over us as we pray. We know that we are being cared for.

                                Step Seven                           53


    With this knowledge comes freedom. Though not a cure by any
means, working the Seventh Step gives us the freedom to choose.
We know that if we live by the spiritual principles of recovery, we no
longer need to wear ourselves out trying to arrange situations and
outcomes. We trust the God of our understanding with our lives. We
may still be fearful from time to time, but we no longer have to react
to fear in destructive ways. We have the freedom to choose to act
constructively or, when appropriate, do nothing at all. Believing that
we are being cared for is a result of developing a relationship with a
Power greater than ourselves. We are in the process of developing a
conscious contact with a Higher Power. We will strive to improve that
contact throughout our lives. We are conscious of the God of our
understanding and feel that Power's presence.
    The process of the Seventh Step brings about a peace of mind
that we never dreamed possible. We sense that what is present
throughout our search for spiritual growth is our ability to feel our
Higher Power's love for us. We glimpse a vision of complete free-
dom from our shortcomings. It doesn't matter that we will not at-
tain a state of perfection or complete humility in our lifetime. The
ability to contemplate this grand vision and meditate upon it are rare
and priceless gifts in their own right.
    We are being changed. We've not only heard about the miracle
of recovery; we are becoming living, breathing examples of what the
power of the NA program can do. The spiritual life has ceased to be
a theory we hear about in meetings; it is now becoming a tangible
reality. We can see a miracle simply by looking in the mirror. The
God of our understanding has taken us from spiritually unconscious,
hopeless addicts to spiritually aware, recovering addicts eager to live.
Although we've reached this point, the damage caused by our short-
comings needs to be addressed. Desiring continued recovery and
freedom, we go on to Step Eight and begin to make amends for the
damage we've caused.

54                                   It Works


                          STEP EIGHT

               "We made a list of all persons we had harmed and
                 became willing to make amends to them all."

    In the previous steps, we began to make peace with our Higher
Power and with ourselves. In the Eighth Step, we begin the process
of making peace with others.
    By acting on our character defects, we inflicted harm on ourselves
and those around us. In the Seventh Step, we asked our Higher Power
to remove our shortcomings. However, in order to gain true free-
dom from our defects, we need to accept responsibility for them. We
need to do whatever we can to repair the harm we've done. In Step
Eight, we begin to rectify our wrongs. We begin to accept responsi-
bility for our actions by listing all the people we have harmed and by
becoming willing to make amends to them all.
    While our efforts to make amends may make a difference in the
lives of those we have harmed, this process has its greatest impact
on our own lives. Our objective is to begin clearing away the dam-
age we've done so that we can continue with our spiritual awaken-
ing. By the time we work our way through the process of making
amends, we will surely be astounded by the level of freedom we feel.
    We are involved in a process designed to free us from our past
so that we are able to live fully in the present. Many of us are haunted
by memories of our mistreatment of others. Those memories can
creep up on us without warning. Our shame and remorse over our
past actions are so deep that these recollections can cause us to feel
unbearable guilt. We want to be free of such guilt. We begin by mak-
ing a list of the people we've harmed.
    Just thinking about our list may frighten us. We may be afraid
that we've done so much damage that we can never repair it, or we
may be afraid of facing the people we've harmed. We find ourselves won-
dering how our amends will be received. Our most hopeful projections


                                        54

                                 Step Eight                          55


probably entail being absolved of any wrongdoing. Our most night-
marish expectations may involve someone refusing to accept our
amends, preferring instead to take revenge. Most of us have fairly
vivid imaginations, but this is not the time to get ahead of ourselves.
We must avoid projections, either negative or positive, about actu-
ally making our amends. We are on the Eighth Step, not the Ninth
Step. At this point, making a list and becoming willing to make
amends are our only concerns.
    Working the previous steps has prepared us for the willingness
we need to begin the Eighth Step. We've honestly assessed the ex-
act nature of our wrongs and examined how our actions affected oth-
ers. It was not easy to admit our wrongs. We had to believe in a
Power that would supply us with courage and love us through the
pain involved in reviewing the results of our addiction. The same hon-
esty and courage we called upon as we wrote our inventory and
shared it are just as vital in making our amends list. We've been prac-
ticing these principles all along and are quite familiar with them. The
Eighth Step is simply a continuation of our efforts to find freedom
by applying spiritual principles.
    Making the list and becoming willing may be difficult unless we
overcome our resentments. Most of us owe amends to at least one
person who has also harmed us. Perhaps we haven't truly forgiven
that person yet and find we are very reluctant to put her or his name
on our list. However, we must. We are responsible for our actions.
We make amends because we owe them. We must let go of resent-
ments and focus on our part in the conflicts in our lives. We won't
get better and be able to live the spiritual life we are seeking if we
are still in the grip of self-obsession. We let go of our expectations,
and we let go of blaming anyone for our actions. Our idea that we
have been a victim must go. In the Eighth Step, we are not con-
cerned with what others have done to us. We are concerned only
with accepting responsibility for what we've done to others.

56                                It Works


     If we still bear anger toward some of the people in our past, we
will need to practice the spiritual principle of forgiveness. Our abil-
ity to forgive comes from our ability to accept and be compassion-
ate with ourselves. However, if we have difficulty, we can ask our
Higher Power for help. We pray for whatever it takes to become will-
ing to forgive. We've begun to accept ourselves as we are. Now we
begin to accept others as they are.
     In developing a list of all the people, places, and institutions to
whom we owe amends, we may wish to review our Fourth Step. If
we've done a thorough Fourth Step, it should clearly outline our part
in the conflicts in our lives and show how we harmed others by act-
ing on our defects of character. We find the people we wounded with
our dishonesty, the people we stole from or cheated, the people who
were on the receiving end of our wrongs. We also take note of how
we harmed society as a whole and add that to our list. We may have
drained community resources, exhibited offensive behavior in pub-
lic, or refused to contribute to the general welfare.
     Although we may find the majority of our amends list from re-
viewing our Fourth Step, Step Eight isn't simply a restatement of our
inventory. We are now looking for the people, places, and institutions
we harmed, not just the types of harm we inflicted. We didn't just lie;
we lied to someone. We didn't just steal; we stole from various people.
     The writing we did on our Fourth Step is not the only source of
help we will be given in compiling our amends list. Our sponsor can
also help us. When we shared our inventory, our sponsor helped us
focus on the exact nature of our wrongs. Our sponsor's insight helped
us see how we had wounded people by acting on our character de-
fects; that same insight will now help us determine who actually be-
longs on our amends list.
     Many of us had trouble seeing how we had harmed ourselves and
may have been surprised when other addicts suggested that we add our
own name to the list. Many of us have gone to extremes in matters of

                               Step Eight                           57


accepting responsibility for ourselves. Some of us have had a ten-
dency to deny any responsibility, while others have taken on total
blame for every disagreement. As we talk with our sponsor and other
addicts, our flawed perceptions begin to fall away and we find the
clarity we need to work the Eighth Step. With the help we have re-
ceived, we start to develop a realistic view of where our responsibil-
ity truly began and ended.
    Before we proceed in making a list, it is important that we under-
stand what the word "harm" means in the context of the Eighth Step.
We may be inclined to think of harm only in terms of physical suffer-
ing. However, there are many different forms of harm: causing men-
tal anguish, property damage or loss, inflicting long-lasting emotional
scars, betraying trust, and so forth. Though we may exclaim, "But I
never meant to hurt anyone!", this is beside the point. We are re-
sponsible for the harm we caused no matter what our intentions were.
Any time when people were hurt in any way because of something
we did, they were harmed. To gain a better understanding of how
we may have harmed people, we may want to "put ourselves in their
shoes." If we can imagine what it felt like to be the victim of our
reckless disregard for those around us, we shouldn't have any trouble
adding those names to our list.
    In addition to understanding what harm means, we also need to
understand what "make amends" means. This step does not say that
we become willing to say we're sorry, although that may be a part of
our amends. Most of the people we've hurt have probably heard us
say "I'm sorry" enough to last a lifetime. In truth, we are becoming
willing to do anything possible to repair the damage we've done, par-
ticularly by changing our behavior.
    There may be instances in which we inflicted harm so severe that
the situation simply can't be set right. This may be readily apparent
as we look at our relationships with those who have been in our lives
for quite some time. Over the years, we have involved our families,

58                              It Works


partners, and long-term friends in one painful situation after another.
Even though we can't undo the past, our experience has shown that
we still need to look at what we've done and acknowledge the dam-
age we've caused. Despite the impossibility of changing what hap-
pened, we can start to make amends by not repeating the same behavior.
    Accepting the harm we caused, being truly sorry, and becoming
willing to go to any lengths to change is a painful process. But we
need not fear our growing pains, for our acknowledgment of these
truths helps us continue our spiritual awakening. Simply accepting
the harm we caused increases our humility. Being truly sorry is a clear
indication that our self-centeredness has diminished. Willing to go
to any lengths to change, we are newly inspired.
    Some of our willingness will come about simply by writing our
amends list. We will have the opportunity to face the harm we've
done. Some of us, after writing the name of a person to whom we
owe amends and what we did to harm that person, have added plans
for how we intend to make amends. Planning how we are going to
make amends may help increase our willingness as we see that we
do have the potential to repair the harm we've caused.
    We want to become willing to make the amends we owe, and we
do whatever it takes to gain that willingness. If we find ourselves
engaging in debates with ourselves or getting caught up in assessing
the exact level of willingness we need, we can lay these counter-
productive thoughts aside by making a conscious decision to pray
for willingness. We may still be slightly hesitant, but we do the best
we can. Our recovery is at stake. If we want to continue with our
recovery, we must make amends.
    We ask God to help us find the willingness to make our amends.
Praying for willingness takes our relationship with the God of our un-
derstanding a step further. In the Seventh Step, we furthered our per-
sonal relationship with our Higher Power by asking for freedom from our
shortcomings. Now we trust that Power to provide us with whatever

                                Step Eight                         59


we need to work the Eighth Step. Our commitment to recovery in-
cludes becoming ready to go as far as we must.
    A Higher Power is working in our lives, preparing us to be of ser-
vice to others. The changes brought about by that Power are evi-
denced by our changing attitudes and actions. We are developing
the ability to choose spiritual principles over character defects and
recovery over addiction. We have a fresh outlook on life, and we know
that we are responsible for what we do. We no longer feel constant
regret over the harm we caused in the past. Simply understanding
how badly we've hurt people, being truly sorry for the pain we've
caused, and becoming willing to let them know of our desire to make
things right are the keys to freedom from our past. Though we have
yet to make peace with others, we've come a long way toward mak-
ing peace with ourselves. With our new perspective, our trust in the
God of our understanding, and our willingness, we go on to Step Nine.

60                                 It Works


                           STEP NINE

           "We made direct amends to such people wherever possible,
              except when to do so would injure them or others."

    Now that we are willing to make amends to all the people we've
harmed, we put our willingness into action by working the Ninth Step.
We're involved in a process that takes us from awareness of our
wrongs and the conflicts they've caused, to a growing freedom from
those conflicts and toward the serenity we are seeking. This process
has called on us to examine our lives, identify our character defects,
and become aware of how we harmed others when we acted on those
defects. Now we must do everything we can to repair the harm we've
caused.
    We have our Eighth Step list, and we know what we have to do;
however, knowing and doing are two different things. We may have
a perfectly good plan for making our amends but, when the moment
arrives, find ourselves overwhelmed by fear and feel unable to go on.
We may be afraid of how our amends will be received. We may be
worried that someone will retaliate. On the other hand, we may be
harboring a secret hope that we will be excused from our responsi-
bilities. We cannot base our willingness on the expectation that we
won't actually have to make restitution. For each of our amends, ev-
ery possibility exists, from being held fully accountable to being com-
pletely excused. We must be willing to follow through, regardless of
the potential outcome. Once again, with the help of our Higher Power,
we simply have to walk through our fear and go on.
    We must be courageous when we work this step. Though the pros-
pect of making amends may frighten us, we turn to the God of our
understanding for strength. Our Higher Power is with us as we make
each of our amends. We rely on the presence of that Power, no mat-
ter how scared we are about approaching the people we have harmed.



                                      60

                                 Step Nine                              61


    We may hesitate, fearing other people won't accept us as readily
as our fellow NA members have. However, we have found that re-
covering addicts don't hold a monopoly on kindness or forgiveness.
Other people are capable of accepting us as we are and understand-
ing our problems. But whether they are willing to accept us or not,
we must go on with making our amends to them. The risk we take is
sure to be rewarded with increased personal freedom.
    The spiritual principles of honesty and humility that we've learned
in earlier steps are invaluable to us in the Ninth Step. We would never
be able to approach the people to whom we owe amends in the spirit
of humility if we hadn't been practicing these principles before now.
The honest examination we used to write our inventory and make our
admissions, the ego-deflation brought about by our work in the Sixth
and Seventh Steps, and the realistic look at how we harmed others
have all worked together to increase our humility and provide us with
the motivation needed to work the Ninth Step. Our path has led us
to humbly accept who we have been and who we are becoming, re-
sulting in a sincere desire to make amends to all those we have
harmed.
    This desire to make amends should be the primary motive for
working the Ninth Step. Making amends isn't something we do sim-
ply because our program of recovery suggests it. To be certain our
motives are based in spiritual principles, we find it helpful to reaffirm
our decision to turn our will over to the care of the God of our un-
derstanding before making each of our amends. A Power greater than
ourselves will provide us with the guidance we need.
    We should not expect a "pat on the back" or praise for living in
accordance with the principles of recovery. People may respond to
our amends in many different ways. They may or may not appreci-
ate our amends. The relationships we have with those people may
get better, or they may not. We may be thanked, or we may be told,
"It's about time you did this." We must let go of any expectations

62                               It Works


we have on how our amends will turn out and leave the results to
the God of our understanding. It is very important that we do our
absolute best to make amends. Once we have done that, however,
our part is finished. We can't expect our amends to magically heal
the hurt feelings of someone we have harmed. We may humbly ask
for forgiveness but, if we don't receive it, we let that expectation go,
knowing we have done our best. As we are making amends, we ask
ourselves if we are doing this because we are truly sorry and have a
genuine desire to make reparations for what we've done. If we an-
swer "yes" to this question, we can be assured that we are approach-
ing our amends in the true spirit of humility and love.
    Keeping our humility in focus, we ask for help from our sponsor.
Whenever possible, we discuss each of our amends with our spon-
sor before we set out to make it. We tell our sponsor what we are mak-
ing amends for, what we are planning to say, and what we intend to
offer to set the situation right. What we intend to offer as amends
should be appropriate to the harm we caused. For instance, if we
borrowed money from someone and never paid it back, we don't
merely apologize; we pay the money back. We talk directly to the
person we harmed and amend exactly what we did wrong.
    When we make amends to those we have held a resentment
against in the past, an attitude of humility is imperative. We don't
want to go to someone, intent on making amends, and end up in a
shouting match over who was injured more severely. Even though
we are sure to have amends to make to people who have also harmed
us, we must set our hurt feelings aside. Our responsibility is to make
amends for what we have done wrong, not to force others to admit
how they have wronged us.
    In our experience, making amends is a two-stage process. Not
only do we make amends to the person we've harmed, we follow up
on those amends with a serious change in our behavior. We mend
our fences and we mend our ways. For example, some of us may

                                Step Nine                            63


have destroyed someone's property while we were angry. When we
make our amends, we not only apologize to the person and replace
or repair the property, we back that up by repairing our attitudes. We
amend our behavior, making a daily effort not to express our anger
by damaging property any more.
    Changing the way we live is a lifetime process and is perhaps the
most significant amends we can make. Some of the people we've
harmed, like our families or others we've been close to for a long time,
have suffered for years. Amends of this nature can't be made in a
five-minute apology, no matter how heartfelt. Although an admis-
sion of wrong and an apology may be the starting point, we need to
go on by making a concerted daily effort to stop hurting our loved
ones. If we have neglected our families, we start spending time with
them. If we have been thoughtless, always forgetting birthdays and
anniversaries, we begin to be thoughtful instead, remembering those
important events. If we have been inconsiderate, always wrapped up
in what we wanted and needed, we now begin to be sensitive to the
needs of others.
    Of course, we may not have an ongoing relationship with some
of the people we have harmed. For instance, if we are divorced from
a spouse with whom we had children, we may owe child-support pay-
ments. Making such amends does not require that we rekindle an
emotional relationship with our ex-partner. Remembering that our
obligations are more than financial, we can work out a mutually ac-
ceptable plan to fulfill those obligations to our children.
    Because the action we take in this step can have a profound
impact on other people, we don't want to just carelessly step out
and start making our amends without first discussing them in detail
with our sponsor. Some of us have felt compelled to make our
amends on an impulse, just to ease our own conscience; however,
we usually ended up doing more harm than good. Suppose that, in
our Fourth Step, we wrote about people we had secretly resented for

64                              It Works


years. Unbeknownst to those people, we had ridiculed, judged, and
condemned them or otherwise defamed their character to others.
Because all that character assassination was taking place behind
those people's backs, do we now go to them and confess? Certainly
not! The Ninth Step is not designed to clear our conscience at the
expense of someone else. Our sponsor will help us find a way to
make appropriate amends without causing additional harm.
     Though it seems obvious that we wouldn't make direct amends
in a situation where we would injure someone, we may find that we
have questions about how to make "direct" amends when the per-
son to whom we owe them is deceased, impossible to find, or lives
thousands of miles away. There are many ways to make effective di-
rect amends without doing it in person. If someone to whom we owe
amends is deceased, we may find it very effective to write a letter
saying everything we would say if the person were still alive. Then,
perhaps, we may read that letter to our sponsor. It may be a noble
desire to want to make amends in person to someone who lives thou-
sands of miles away, but most of us lack the means to travel great
distances solely for that purpose. In such situations, a telephone call
or letter could serve the same purpose as an amends made in per-
son. The people on our list who we can't find should remain on our
list. An opportunity to make amends may present itself later on, even
years later. In the meantime, we must remain willing to make those
amends. Of course, we should never avoid making amends in per-
son only because we are afraid of facing the person we have harmed.
We make every effort to find the people we have harmed and make
the best amends we can make.
     Choosing the best way to make amends requires careful consid-
eration and time spent searching our conscience for what is right.
Some of us have to face situations that can't be corrected. Our ac-
tions may have left permanent physical or emotional scars or even
caused someone's death. We must somehow learn to live with such

                                 Step Nine                            65


things. We live with indescribable remorse over such acts and won-
der what we could possibly do to make amends. This is where we
have no choice but to rely on our Higher Power. We may have diffi-
culty in forgiving ourselves, but we can ask for the forgiveness of a
loving God. We sit down, become quiet in the presence of our Higher
Power, and ask for guidance in what we should do. Many of us have
found answers in dedicating our lives to helping other addicts and
other forms of service to humanity. There are no easy answers for
problems like these; we simply do the very best we can, relying on
our sponsor and the God of our understanding for guidance.
    For many of us, the wreckage of our past includes such relatively
minor things as outstanding arrest warrants for traffic violations, while
others have committed crimes entailing very serious consequences.
We may find ourselves in a dilemma over such issues. If we turn our-
selves in to the authorities, we may go to jail. If we don't, we may
live in fear of being caught and sent to jail anyway. With the help of
our sponsor and the God of our understanding, we are willing to do
whatever it takes to maintain our recovery. We may also have to rely
on legal advice before making such amends. Consulting a lawyer
about these problems can be of great benefit.
    Especially troublesome financial amends may also require pro-
fessional advice. Many of us have amassed debts at an alarming rate.
We may owe financial amends that are beyond our means to pay in
the foreseeable future. Some of us may owe bills that amount to
more than we can conceivably earn in the next several years. Some
of us rarely paid our rent, utility bills, or phone bills. We may have
found it easier to uproot our lives and move rather than meet our
financial obligations.
    Just as we do for all of our amends, we discuss our financial
amends with our sponsor first. Some of us have begun providing for
our families since we've been in recovery; they are dependent on us
for their food and shelter. We usually find that we have to budget

66                               It Works


our money very carefully in order to meet our current living expenses
while paying as much as possible on our old debts. We may resolve
such situations by contacting our creditors, explaining our situation,
and expressing our desire to settle our debts. We agree on a rea-
sonable plan for paying off our debts, and we stick to it. This is an
example of how living our amends is a process rather than a "once
and for all" occurrence. It takes great discipline, personal sacrifice,
and commitment to continue to pay a bill for years and years, but
we can regain our self-respect only by following through.
    Most of us find making amends for the damage we did in inti-
mate relationships to be extremely uncomfortable. As we wrote our
Fourth Step, we realized that we not only robbed ourselves of the
chance for meaningful relationships, we also caused deep emotional
wounds in our partners. Our fears of intimacy or commitment may
have led us to use, be unfaithful to, or abandon the people who loved
us. We were generally unavailable to those people. While there are
times when we need to approach such people with our amends, there
are other times when it is best to leave them alone so as not to re-
open old wounds. Knowing the difference requires complete hon-
esty on our part and open communication with our sponsor. Whether
or not we make direct amends to the people we've harmed in rela-
tionships, we definitely need to change the way we behave in our re-
lationships today. If we ran from intimacy before, we need to sit down
and learn to communicate with our partners. We must become more
considerate, sensitive, and attentive to the needs of others.
    Sometimes, the only way we can make amends is to change the
way we live. As discussed in the Eighth Step, we may owe amends
to our community or society as a whole. Though this may seem to
be an abstract concept, we must make concrete amends by chang-
ing our behavior. If we harmed society, we start to make amends by
becoming a productive member of society. We contribute. We look
for ways to give, not take.

                                 Step Nine                             67


    Our recovery is also a way of making amends to ourselves. We
treated ourselves horribly in our active addiction. The guilt and shame
we felt each time we harmed another human being took quite a toll
on our self-respect. Our addiction humiliated us in a thousand dif-
ferent ways. Now, in recovery, we learn to treat ourselves in ways that
demonstrate our self-respect.
    The most important results of the Ninth Step will be found within
ourselves. This step teaches us a great deal about humility, love, self-
lessness, and forgiveness. We begin to heal from our addiction and
no longer live with as many regrets. We grow spiritually and find that
we are truly gaining a new level of freedom in our lives. Our past is just
that: the past. We have put it behind us so that it no longer hovers on
the edge of our thoughts, waiting for a chance to haunt our present.
    One of the most wonderful gifts we derive from working the Ninth
Step is the knowledge that we are becoming better human beings.
We realize how much we have changed because we are no longer do-
ing the things for which we are making amends. We may not have
realized how much we had changed in our recovery until now. The
amends process drives home the knowledge that we are becoming
truly different people. The extended nightmare of our addiction is
finally beginning to fade in the dawning light of our recovery.
    Our humility increases as we face the people we have harmed.
The impact of realizing how deeply our actions have affected other
people shocks us out of our self-obsession. We begin to understand
that other people have real feelings and that we are capable of hurt-
ing them if we are careless. We learn about being considerate of other
people as we work this step, and what we learn is what we practice
in our lives today. It becomes natural for us to think before we speak
or act, keeping in mind that what we say or do is going to affect our
friends, our families, and our fellow NA members. We approach
people with love and kindness, carrying within ourselves a deep and
abiding respect for the feelings of others.

68                              It Works


    Because of the humility and selflessness so necessary in making
our amends, we may be surprised at the way Step Nine enhances our
self-esteem. One of the most paradoxical aspects of our recovery is
that by thinking of ourselves less, we learn to love ourselves more.
We may not have expected our spiritual journey to lead to a fresh
appreciation of ourselves, but it does. Because of the love we ex-
tend to others, we realize our own value. We learn that what we con-
tribute makes a difference, not just in NA but in the world at large.
    As a result of working the Ninth Step, we are free to live in the
present, able to enjoy each moment and experience gratitude for the
gift of recovery. Memories of the past no longer hold us back, and
new possibilities appear. We are free to go in directions we never
considered before. We are free to dream and to pursue the fulfill-
ment of our dreams. Our lives stretch out before us like a limitless
horizon. We may stumble from time to time, but the Tenth Step gives
us the opportunity to pick ourselves up and keep walking forward.
Our Higher Power has given us an invitation to live, and we accept it
with gratitude.

                                 Step Ten                              69


                            STEP TEN

                  "We continued to take personal inventory
               and when we were wrong promptly admitted it."

    Recovery in Narcotics Anonymous is about learning how to live.
Incorporating the spiritual principles we learned in the first nine steps
into our lives has made it possible to live in harmony with ourselves
and others. Self-examination, confronting what we find in ourselves,
and owning up to our wrongs are critical elements of conducting our
lives on a spiritual basis. By working the Tenth Step, we become more
aware of our emotions, our mental state, and our spiritual condition.
As we do, we find ourselves constantly rewarded with fresh insight.
    Some of us look back at our Fourth Step and wonder why we have
to do a Tenth Step. We may think that we've corrected all our past
mistakes in the previous steps; since we have no intention of mak-
ing those mistakes again, why should we continue with this relent-
less self-examination? The Tenth Step seems like a tiresome chore
to some of us, a painful exercise that we could just as well avoid.
But we must continue to grow, and that's exactly what the Tenth Step
helps us do. Though we will return to the previous steps again and
again, the Tenth Step furthers our spiritual healing in a different way:
by creating an awareness of what's going on in our lives today.
    The importance of keeping in touch with our thoughts, attitudes,
feelings, and behavior cannot be overemphasized. Every day, life pre-
sents us with new challenges. Our recovery depends on our willing-
ness to meet those challenges. Our experience tells us that some
members relapse, even after long periods of clean time, because they
have become complacent in recovery, allowing their resentments to
build and refusing to acknowledge their wrongs. Little by little, those
small hurts, half-truths, and "justified" grudges turn into deep disap-
pointments, serious self-deceptions, and full-blown resentments. We



                                    69

70                                It Works


can't allow these threats to compromise our recovery. We have to
deal with situations such as these as soon as they arise.
     In the Tenth Step, we use all the principles and actions we learned
in the previous steps, applying them to our lives on a consistent ba-
sis. Beginning our days by reaffirming our decision to live life accord-
ing to our Higher Power's will has helped many of us keep spiritual
ideals foremost in our minds throughout the day. Even so, we are
bound to make mistakes that are very familiar to us. We can attribute
virtually every wrongdoing to a character defect we identified in the Sixth
Step. Humbly asking the God of our understanding to remove our short-
comings is just as necessary now as it was in the Seventh Step.
     In the Tenth Step, we take such actions on a regular basis. Each
day, we take our own inventory, look for those times when we fall short
of our spiritual ideals, and renew our efforts to live a principle-centered
life. For example, when we are faced with the tendency to behave
compulsively, ignoring the consequences of our actions, we need to
focus on spiritual principles, take prompt action, and continue for-
ward in our recovery.
     Although forming a habit of working this step may be difficult at
first, we must persist. We can set aside some time during the day for
focused self-appraisal while gradually moving toward a goal of being
able to look at ourselves throughout the day. We keep going forward,
striving each moment to become ever more aware of ourselves. We
need to develop self-discipline; the more effort we put into doing so,
the more we'll find that working the Tenth Step will become as natu-
ral as breathing.
     Not that we should be hard on ourselves, picking at our every
motive and looking for problems where none exist. We need to stay
in tune with the voice of our conscience and listen to what it's tell-
ing us. When we get a nagging feeling that something isn't quite right,
we should pay attention to it. If our feelings of guilt or anger seem
to go on for a long time, we can do something about them. We know

                                Step Ten                              71


when something is bothering us--perhaps not immediately, but usu-
ally not too long after the fact. As soon as we become aware that
we're feeling ill at ease, we search out the cause and deal with it as
soon as possible.
    While we strive to maintain ongoing awareness throughout the day,
it is also helpful to sit down at the end of each day and quietly re-
flect on what has happened and how we responded to it. Often, our
sponsor will suggest that we write out our Tenth Step. We may also
make use of our informational pamphlet, Living the Program. In this
step, we ask ourselves the same types of questions we asked in the
Fourth Step; the only difference is that the emphasis is on today. We
look at our current behavior and ask ourselves if we are living by our
values. Am I being honest today? Am I maintaining personal integ-
rity in my relations with others? Am I growing, or am I slipping back
into old patterns? We concentrate on the overall picture of our day.
    In order to examine our day--or our life, for that matter--in its
entirety, we have to draw on the humility we've acquired in the previ-
ous steps. We have learned quite a bit about ourselves: how we've
responded to life in the past and how we want to respond to life now.
It takes a great deal of awareness to humbly acknowledge our part
in our own lives.
    We may have trouble knowing when we are wrong simply because
we usually intend to be right. For instance, at some point in our re-
covery, we may attend a group business meeting firmly convinced that
we know what the group should do. We've studied all sides of the
issues. We forcefully share our views at the meeting. We're so con-
vinced of our rightness that we fail to recognize our self-righteousness.
We are blind to the harm we're causing others by not respecting their
views as much as our own.
    Often we act in ways that are contrary to our values, yet we ex-
pect others to live up to our standards. For instance, we may find
ourselves flinching when we hear others gossiping about someone.

72                                It Works


Following such an occurrence, we are likely to be self-righteous--until
we catch ourselves doing the very same thing. Other situations can
occur when we become supercritical of others. For example, we may
have a tendency to have high expectations of others; however, we
have a variety of excuses at hand for why these standards don't ap-
ply to us! If we find ourselves in the midst of such moral uncertainty,
we can use the principles of the Tenth Step to provide more clarity.
    There may be other times in our lives when we find ourselves in
a situation that seems to require a compromise of our personal be-
liefs and values. For instance, if we had gained employment at a com-
pany only to discover that our employer expected us to indulge in
questionable business practices, we could reasonably expect to feel
confused about the choices available to us. Deciding what to do
about such a difficult dilemma would be a tough decision for any one
of us. We may be tempted to make a snap judgment or expect our
sponsor to provide an easy answer; however, we have found that no
one can solve such a dilemma for us. While our sponsor will provide
us with guidance, we must apply the principles of the program for
ourselves and arrive at our own decision. In the end, we are the ones
who must live with our conscience. In order to do so comfortably, we
must decide what is, and what is not, morally acceptable in our lives.
    It can be very confusing to determine when we were wrong, es-
pecially when we're right in the middle of a conflict. When our emo-
tions are running high, we may not be able to take an honest look at
ourselves. We can see only our immediate wants and needs. At such
times, our sponsor may suggest that we take a personal inventory
on a particular area of our lives so that we can see our part. If our
friends notice that we're acting on a character defect, they may sug-
gest that we talk to our sponsor about it. Being open-minded to the
suggestions of our sponsor and our NA friends, paying attention to what
our conscience is telling us, spending some quiet time with the God of
our understanding--all these things will lead us to greater clarity.

                                 Step Ten                            73


    Once we're aware that we've been wrong--whether it's five min-
utes, five hours, or five days after the fact--we need to admit our
error as soon as possible and correct any harm we've caused. As in
the Ninth Step, we find that the process of admitting our mistakes
and changing our behavior brings about tremendous freedom.
    Of course, we must be just as careful when amending our cur-
rent behavior as we were when we made amends in the Ninth Step.
For instance, if we find that we were wrong because we sat in a meet-
ing silently judging someone who shared, we certainly don't need to
go tell that person what we were thinking. Instead, we can make an
effort to be more tolerant.
    We must remember that the Tenth Step isn't a one-sided endeavor,
an exercise in noting what we have done wrong. We must resist any
urge to become obsessive with this step, ruthlessly searching out ev-
ery flaw in our character. The point of the Tenth Step is for us to be
willing to pay attention to our thoughts, behaviors, and values, then
work on what we need to change. We should acknowledge that, quite
often, our motives are good and we do things right. Character de-
fects and character assets do not exclude each other, and we are sure
to find both on any given day.
    We develop recovery-oriented goals for ourselves as we work this
step. When we see that we've been afraid to go forward in a particu-
lar area of our lives, we can resolve to take a few risks, drawing our
courage from our Higher Power. When we see that we've been self-
ish, we can strive to become more generous in the future. When we
realize today that we've fallen short in any area of our lives, we don't
have to be overwhelmed by feelings of dread and fear of failure. In-
stead, we can be grateful for our self-awareness and begin to feel a
sense of hope. We know that, by applying our program of recovery
to our shortcomings, we will change and grow.
    We begin to see ourselves more realistically as a result of work-
ing the Tenth Step. Many of us have remarked on the freedom we

74                               It Works


experienced through freely admitting our mistakes and releasing our-
selves from unrealistic expectations. Where before we went from one
extreme to another, either feeling better than everyone else or feel-
ing worthless, we now find the middle ground where true self-worth
can flourish. We feel renewed hope as we uncover long-neglected
assets in this step. We see ourselves as we really are, accepting our
good qualities along with our defects, knowing we can change with
the help of a Higher Power. We are becoming what we were meant
to be all along: whole human beings.
    Although all of us need the love and attention of others, that
doesn't mean we must depend on people to provide what we can
only find within ourselves. We can stop making unreasonable de-
mands on others and begin to give of ourselves in relationships. Our
romantic relationships, our friendships, and our interactions with fam-
ily members, co-workers, and casual acquaintances are undergoing
an astounding change. We are free to enjoy another's companion-
ship because we're no longer so obsessed with ourselves. We finally
see that all the devices we use to keep other people away are un-
necessary at best and, more often than not, are the underlying cause
of the pain we suffer in our relationships.
    Healthier relationships are just one indication that the quality of
our lives has improved dramatically. Such indications merely reflect
the intangible but very real changes that have taken place inside us.
Our entire outlook has changed. Compared to the spiritual values
we hold dear today, concerns such as "looking good" or amassing
material wealth pale in significance. By accepting the challenge of
self-appraisal called for in the Tenth Step, we've discovered that we
value our recovery and our relationship with the God of our under-
standing above all else.
    As the inner chaos that we lived with for so long subsides, we
begin to experience long periods of serenity. During these times, we
experience the powerful presence of a loving God in our lives. We

                               Step Ten                           75


are increasingly conscious of that Power and are ready to search for
ways to maintain and improve our contact with it. Seeking direction
and meaning for our lives, we go on to the Eleventh Step.

76                               It Works


                       STEP ELEVEN

  "We sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious contact
with God as we understood Him, praying only for knowledge of His will for
                    us and the power to carry that out."

    Throughout our recovery, one of the things which stands out as
a result of our working the steps is our success in building a rela-
tionship with the God of our understanding. Our initial efforts re-
sulted in the decision we made in the Third Step. We continued by
working the following steps, each one of which were designed to clear
away whatever barriers might stand between our Higher Power and
ourselves. As a result, we are open to receive our Higher Power's
love and guidance directly into our lives.
    For many of us, the characteristics of our disease and the things
we did in our active addiction separated us from our Higher Power.
Our self-obsession made it difficult for most of us to even believe in
a Power greater than ourselves, much less achieve conscious con-
tact with that Power. We could see no purpose or meaning in our
lives. Nothing could begin to fill the emptiness we felt. It seemed
as though we shared no common bond with others at all. We felt
alone in a vast universe, believing nothing existed beyond what our
limited view allowed us to see.
    However, once we begin to recover, we find our obsession with
ourselves diminishing and our awareness of the presence of a Higher
Power growing. We've begun to see that we aren't alone and never
have been. Through working the previous steps, we have already
achieved a conscious contact with the God of our understanding. Our
separation and isolation have ended. In the Eleventh Step, we now
seek to improve our conscious contact with the God of our understand-
ing through prayer and meditation.




                                    76

                                Step Eleven                         77


    Many of us had trouble understanding the meaning of "praying
for power" in the Eleventh Step. At first glance, this seemed to con-
tradict the most basic aspect of our recovery program: our admis-
sion of powerlessness. But if we take another look at the First Step,
we'll see that it says we were powerless over our addiction, not that
we won't be given the power to carry out the will of the God of our
understanding. We did begin at a point of powerlessness in the First
Step; we were powerless over our addiction and incapable of carry-
ing out any will but our own. This doesn't mean we gain power over
our addiction in the Eleventh Step. In the Eleventh Step, we pray
for a particular kind of power: the power to carry out God's will.
    We no longer shy away from spiritual growth because it has be-
come so essential to maintaining the peace of mind we've found.
Perhaps at the beginning of our recovery we worked the steps be-
cause we were in pain and afraid we would relapse if we didn't. But
today we are motivated less by pain and fear, driven more by our long-
ing for continued recovery.
    This leaning toward recovery reveals that we've surrendered more
completely. We've reached a state where we actually believe that the
will of a Power greater than ourselves is better for us than our own
will. It has become second nature for us to ask ourselves what our
Higher Power would have us do in our lives rather than attempting
to manipulate situations so they happen according to our ideas of
what's best. We no longer see God's will for us as something we have
to endure. On the contrary, we make a conscious effort to align our
will with our Higher Power's, believing that we'll gain more happi-
ness and peace of mind by doing so. This is what surrender is: a
heartfelt belief in our own fallibility as human beings and an equally
heartfelt decision to rely on a Power greater than our own. Sur-
render, the stumbling block of our addiction, has become the cor-
nerstone of our recovery.

78                                It Works


    However, we cannot recover on surrender alone. We must build
on our surrender by taking action, just as we have in the previous
steps. In the Tenth Step, we began to practice the discipline required
to live spiritually on a daily basis. We continue practicing this prin-
ciple in the Eleventh Step by persisting in our efforts to take action
each day. We place prayer and meditation high on our priority list.
We resolve to make prayer and meditation as much a part of our daily
routine as eating and sleeping, and then we employ the necessary
self-discipline to achieve our resolve.
    To work this step, we must also increase the courage we've de-
veloped in the previous steps. Though the courage we demonstrated
when we honestly and thoroughly examined ourselves was beyond
anything we had previously experienced, we now need to develop a
markedly different form of courage. We need the courage to live ac-
cording to spiritual principles, even when we are afraid of the results.
Despite our fear, we do what's necessary and draw on the endless
well of courage we can find by tapping into a Power greater than
ourselves.
    With all this discussion of God, we may again find ourselves grow-
ing uncomfortable, perhaps wondering if this is where the "religious
catch" we've anticipated is going to be revealed. We may wonder if
our sponsor is now going to inform us that we must pray or medi-
tate in a particular way. Before we get carried away with such fears,
we would do well to remember one of the basic principles of recov-
ery in Narcotics Anonymous: our absolute and unconditional free-
dom to believe in any Higher Power we choose and, of course, our
right to communicate with our Higher Power in whatever way con-
forms to our individual beliefs. Although some of us practice a tra-
ditional religion, only rarely do we hear specific religious beliefs
discussed in our meetings. We respect the rights of our members to
form their own spiritual beliefs and tend to frown on anything with
the potential to dilute the spiritual message of recovery.

                                Step Eleven                            79


     In this encouraging atmosphere, most of us find it relatively easy
to discard our preconceived ideas of the "right" way to pray or medi-
tate. Finding our own way is another matter. We may have a basic
understanding of what prayer and meditation are, prayer being the
times we talk to a Higher Power and meditation the times we listen
for a Higher Power's answers. We may not be aware of the many op-
tions that are open to us. Searching those options out and explor-
ing their usefulness to us can be uncomfortable and time-consuming.
It is only by being open-minded and by taking action that we are likely
to find what is right for us as individuals. We may experiment with a
whole assortment of practices until we find something that doesn't
feel foreign or contrived. If we have found that everything feels strange,
then we practice a form of prayer and meditation until it no longer
seems unnatural. Many of us have adopted an eclectic approach,
borrowing our practices from a variety of sources and combining
those which provide us the greatest comfort and enlightenment.
     We are on a spiritual path which will lead us to a greater under-
standing of our Higher Power. Many of us have remarked on the great
joy we find along the way. We are sure to get help from our fellow
members or, perhaps, even from others who are also walking a spiri-
tual path. Seeking out these individuals and asking for their guid-
ance can help us find our own answers; however, sharing in another's
experience does not excuse us from the need to seek our own. Oth-
ers may be able to show us the path they walked, sharing with us
the joy and insight they found along the way; nevertheless, we may
find our spiritual paths taking a different turn and have to adjust our
method of travel accordingly. In the end, we find what's true for us
in moments of personal contact with our Higher Power. The experi-
ence shared by others is just that: experience, not ultimate answers to
the mysteries of life.
     Our understanding of a Higher Power grows and changes through
prayer and meditation. We find that it is too limiting to define our

80                               It Works


Higher Power in such a way that our understanding is set in stone
once and for all. An interesting parallel can be drawn if we remem-
ber the times we've thoughtlessly tossed other human beings into
categories and left them there. We deprived ourselves of an oppor-
tunity to know someone else on a deeper level. Treating our Higher
Power as something to be defined will rob us on a grand scale, halting
further spiritual growth the minute we arrive at an absolute definition.
    In addition to the open-mindedness so necessary to working the
Eleventh Step, it is vital that we actively pursue knowledge of God's
will for us and the power to carry it out. This knowledge is what we
are searching for when we pray, whether our prayers are desperate
pleas or calm requests for guidance. Regardless of our state of mind
when asking for guidance, we can be sure that our consistent efforts
to seek knowledge of our Higher Power's will for us will be rewarded.
    We should remember that Step Eleven asks us to pray only for
the knowledge of God's will and the power to carry that out. Just as
we opened our minds and avoided restricting our understanding of
our Higher Power, we avoid placing limitations on what God's will for
us can be. Though the temptation to pray for a particular result may
be great, we must resist the urge to do so if we want to experience
the rewards of the Eleventh Step. Praying for specific solutions to
specific problems is not the answer.
    For instance, at some time in our lives, we may feel unhappy but
not know exactly what is causing such unhappiness. After spending
a few minutes in prayer, seeking a specific solution to our unhappi-
ness, we may suddenly get an idea that all our problems are caused
by our boring job and demanding boss. We may even go to great
lengths to convince ourselves that our idea was divinely inspired. We,
as addicts, are subject to take such random thoughts and run with
them, impulsively quitting our jobs. This scenario may seem extreme.
Its point is that, by praying only for knowledge of God's will for us
and the power to carry that out, we can avoid our former tendency

                                 Step Eleven                           81


to allow fleeting whims and superstition to dictate the course of our
lives. Knowledge of our Higher Power's will does not usually come
in a momentary blinding flash, but in a gradual awakening brought
about by the continued practice of prayer and meditation.
     Practicing the Eleventh Step involves a daily discipline of prayer
and meditation. This discipline reinforces our commitment to recov-
ery, to living a new way of life, and to developing further our relation-
ship with our Higher Power. Through this daily practice, we begin to
glimpse the limitless freedom we can be afforded through God's love.
We have found that following such a discipline also results in a firm
belief in our own right to happiness and peace of mind.
     We see that, regardless of the presence or absence of material
success in our lives, we can be content. We can be happy and ful-
filled with or without money, with or without a partner, with or with-
out the approval of others. We've begun to see that God's will for
us is the ability to live with dignity, to love ourselves and others, to
laugh, and to find great joy and beauty in our surroundings. Our most
heartfelt longings and dreams for our lives are coming true. These
priceless gifts are no longer beyond our reach. They are, in fact, the
very essence of God's will for us.
     In our gratitude, we go beyond merely asking for the power to
live up to God's plan for our own lives. We begin to seek out ways
to be of service, to make a difference in the life of another addict, to
carry the message of recovery. Our spiritual awakening has opened
us up to spiritual contentment, unconditional love, and personal free-
dom. Knowing that we can only keep this precious gift by sharing it
with others, we go on to Step Twelve.

82                                   It Works


                           STEP TWELVE

         "Having had a spiritual awakening as a result of these steps,
    we tried to carry this message to addicts and to practice these principles
                               in all our affairs."

    In a sense, Step Twelve encompasses all the steps. We must make
use of what we've learned in the previous eleven as we carry the mes-
sage and practice the principles of recovery in all our affairs. Indi-
vidually and collectively, each step has contributed to the extraordinary
transformation which we know as a spiritual awakening.
    Many of us have wondered how this spiritual awakening comes
about. Does it happen all at once, or does it occur slowly over a
long period of time? While there may be great variations within our
experience about this awakening of the spirit, we all agree that it re-
sults from working the steps.
    Our awakening has been progressive, beginning with a spark of
awareness in the First Step. Before we admitted the truth about our
addiction, we knew only the darkness of denial. But when we sur-
rendered, acknowledging that we couldn't arrest our addiction or hope
for a better life on our own, a ray of light broke through the dark-
ness, beginning our spiritual awakening.
    Though each individual's experience of a spiritual awakening var-
ies, some experiences are so common as to be almost universal.
Humility is one of these common factors. We first began to experi-
ence humility when we opened our minds to the possibility that a
Power greater than ourselves existed. For some of us, this experi-
ence was so astounding that we received an almost physical jolt from
the knowledge that we weren't alone in our struggle for recovery. Step
Two allowed us our first glimpse of hope. That hope had an imme-
diate and powerful effect on our despairing spirit, providing us with
a reason to go on.



                                        82

                               Step Twelve                            83


    Our desire for something different prompted us to a deeper level
of surrender in the Third Step. Not only did we admit that we couldn't
control our addiction, we went on to recognize that our will and lives
would be better left to the care of our Higher Power. Paradoxically,
in this admission we found our greatest strength. As we worked the
Third Step, we began to understand that we could tap the limitless re-
source of our Higher Power for everything needed to heal us spiritually.
    This included the courage we knew we would need to work the
Fourth Step. Many of us dreaded the process of self-appraisal called
for in Step Four, despite the gentle assurances of our fellow NA mem-
bers that we would find spiritual rewards in the process. Though we
were afraid, we went forward, somehow believing in the experience
of other recovering addicts. Once our inventory was completed, we
no longer needed convincing. In the process, we had experienced
spiritual growth for ourselves. Our spirits were strengthened by our
emerging integrity. The shaping of values, so essential to our char-
acter, was just one of the positive results we found in the Fourth Step.
    Unlike the admission we made in the First Step, which was made
in desperation, the admission we made in Step Five was voluntary.
This complete disclosure of our innermost selves, made without res-
ervation, resulted in a breakthrough in our ability to accept ourselves
and trust others. Our sponsor's acceptance and our Higher Power's
unconditional love made it possible for us to judge ourselves less
harshly. We developed a little more humility with the awareness of
the exact nature of our wrongs. We began to understand that humil-
ity and self-loathing are incompatible and can't exist at the same time.
    With our awareness of the exact nature of our wrongs--our char-
acter defects--and the humility inherent in that awareness, our de-
sire to change increased dramatically as we worked Step Six. Though
we may have experienced some apprehension about surrendering our
character defects, we overcame our fears by drawing on the trust and
faith we had developed in a loving God. Trust and faith, two important

84                                It Works


elements of a spiritual awakening, made it possible for us to become
entirely ready to allow a Power greater than ourselves to work in our lives.
    Consciously asking the God of our understanding to help us in
Step Seven was an important development in the awakening of our
spirit. That request was tangible evidence of how much we had
changed spiritually. This was the point where many of us began to
sense the enormous difference that our Higher Power could make in
our lives. Because we had asked for and been granted some free-
dom from having to act on our shortcomings, we finally began to
grasp what the miracle of recovery offers us.
    Carried along by the promise of continued freedom in our lives,
we proceeded, in Step Eight, to make ourselves aware of what we
had done to others in our active addiction. Again, we saw how the
spiritual preparation of the previous steps made it possible for us to
withstand the pain and remorse of listing the people we had harmed.
Our willingness to make amends to them all brought us further away
from the grip of self-obsession. Our search for recovery was no longer
focused on what we could get out of it for ourselves. We saw be-
yond the confines of our own lives, and our efforts in recovery be-
gan to be more generous. We developed the ability to feel empathy
for others.
    Once we had engaged in the process of making amends in the
Ninth Step, we could see how it contributed to our spiritual growth.
Our humility was enhanced by our newfound appreciation of others'
feelings. Our self-esteem grew along with our increased capacity to
forgive both ourselves and others. We were able to give of ourselves.
Most of all, we gained freedom--freedom to live in the present and
feel that we belonged in the world.
    The discipline we practiced in the Tenth Step ensured that we con-
tinued to breathe new life into our awakening spirits. We practiced
ongoing adherence to our newfound values, thereby strengthening
their importance in our lives. We saw that, by making our spiritual

                               Step Twelve                           85


development our primary focus, other aspects of our lives would
progress naturally as they were meant to all along.
    Focusing our attention on our spiritual development brought us
to the Eleventh Step. We had already become increasingly conscious
of a powerful presence operating in our lives: a Power that could re-
store our sanity and remove our shortcomings. Through recognizing
the love demonstrated by such actions, we started to better under-
stand the loving nature of our Higher Power. The spiritual void we
felt at the beginning of our recovery has been filled with gratitude,
unconditional love, and a desire to be of service to God and others.
Undeniably, we have experienced a spiritual awakening.
    In order to cultivate this awakening, we have found it essential
to express our gratitude and practice the principles of recovery in ev-
ery area of our lives. However, this isn't something we do only to
ensure that our own recovery continues. Narcotics Anonymous is
not a selfish program. In fact, the spirit of the Twelfth Step is
grounded in the principle of selfless service. Upholding this principle
in our efforts to carry the message is of the utmost importance, both
to our own spiritual state and to those to whom we are trying to carry
the message.
    Step Twelve has a paradoxical aspect in that the more we help
others, the more we help ourselves. For instance, if we find ourselves
troubled and our faith wavering, there are very few actions that have
such an immediate uplifting effect on us as helping a newcomer. One
small act of generosity can work wonders; our self-absorption dimin-
ishes and we end up with a better perspective on what previously
seemed like overwhelming problems. Every time we tell someone else
that Narcotics Anonymous works, we reinforce our belief in the program.
    When being of service in Narcotics Anonymous, many of us have
chosen to give back to the program in the same way we were helped
when new. Some of us whose first contact with NA was through the
area phoneline have found it rewarding to serve on the phoneline

86                                 It Works


ourselves. Others have been drawn to hospitals and institutions ser-
vice work because we first heard the message of NA in a jail or hos-
pital. Whatever form of service we choose to be involved in, we do
so with our primary purpose of carrying the message in mind.
    Now we must ask ourselves, just what is "the message" we are
trying to carry? Is it that we never have to use drugs again? Is it
that, through recovery, we cease being likely candidates for jails, in-
stitutions, and an early death? Is it the hope that an addict, any ad-
dict, can recover from the disease of addiction? Well, it's all of this
and more. The message we carry is that, by practicing the principles
contained within the Twelve Steps, we have had a spiritual awaken-
ing. Whatever that means for each one of us is the message we carry
to those seeking recovery.
    The ways in which we carry the message are as varied as our mem-
bers. There are, however, some basic guidelines that we, as a fellow-
ship, have found to be helpful. First and foremost, we share our
experience, strength, and hope. This means that we share our expe-
rience, not the theories we have heard from other sources. This also
means that we share our own experience, not someone else's. It is
not our job to tell someone seeking recovery where to work, who to
live with, how to raise their children, or anything else outside the realm
of our experience with recovery. Someone we are trying to help may
have problems in these areas; we can help best not by managing that
person's life, but by sharing our own experience in those areas.
    Developing a personal style for carrying the message rests on a
simple requirement: We must be ourselves. We each have a special,
one-of-a-kind personality that is sure to be an attraction to many.
Some of us have a sparkling sense of humor which may reach some-
one in despair. Some of us are especially warm and compassionate,
able to reach an addict who has rarely been the recipient of kind-
ness. Some of us have a remarkable talent for telling the truth, in
no uncertain terms, to an addict literally dying to hear it. Some of

                               Step Twelve                          87


us are a valuable asset on any service committee, while others do
better working one-on-one with a suffering addict. Whatever our own
personality makeup, we can be assured that when we sincerely try to
carry the message, we can reach the addict seeking recovery.
    Yet there are limits to what we can do to help another addict. We
cannot force anyone to stop using. We cannot "give" someone the
results of working the steps, nor can we grow for them. We cannot
magically remove someone's loneliness or pain. Not only are we pow-
erless over our own addiction, we are powerless over everyone else's.
We can only carry the message; we cannot determine who will receive it.
    It is absolutely none of our business to decide who is ready to
hear the message of recovery and who is not. Many of us have
formed such a judgment about an addict's desire for recovery and
have been mistaken. Multiple relapses do not necessarily signify a
lack of interest in recovery, nor does the "model newcomer" demon-
strate, without a doubt, a certainty of "making it." It is our purpose
and our privilege to share the message of recovery unconditionally
with anyone expressing a desire to receive it.
    The principle of unconditional love is expressed in our attitude.
Anyone who reaches out for help is entitled to our compassion, our
attention, and our unconditional acceptance. Any addict, regardless
of clean time, should be able to pour out his or her pain in an atmo-
sphere free of judgment. Most of us have found that we are able to
feel great empathy for those who suffer from our disease precisely
because it is our disease. Our empathy isn't abstract, nor is our un-
derstanding. Instead, it is born in shared experience. We greet each
other with the recognition reserved for survivors of the same nearly
fatal catastrophe. This shared experience, more than anything else,
contributes to the atmosphere of unconditional love in our meetings.
    Helping others is perhaps the highest aspiration of the human
heart and something we have been entrusted with as a result of a
Higher Power working in our lives. We would do well to remember to

88                                It Works


ask the God of our understanding to continue working through us in
our efforts to carry the message. Diligently practicing the principles
of recovery will ensure that the connection between ourselves and
our Higher Power remains open and that our service to others is firmly
rooted in spirituality.
    Spirituality becomes a way of life for us as we live by the prin-
ciples of recovery. The example of a life lived according to these prin-
ciples is potentially the most powerful message we can carry. We don't
need to wait until we're "on" the Second Step to practice the prin-
ciple of open-mindedness. Courage and honesty have a place in our
lives even when we aren't writing an inventory. Humility is always a
desirable state, whether we are asking the God of our understanding
to remove our shortcomings, conducting business with a co-worker,
or talking to a friend.
    To practice the principles of recovery in all our affairs is what we
strive for. Both in and out of meetings, no matter who is involved,
no matter how difficult it may seem, we make the principles of re-
covery the guides by which we live. Only through the practice of these
principles in our daily life can we hope to achieve the spiritual growth
necessary to maintain our reprieve from the disease of addiction.
Though this may seem a lofty goal, we have found it attainable. Our
gratitude for the gift of recovery becomes the underlying force in all
we do, motivating us and weaving its way through our lives and the
lives of those around us.
    Even in silence, the voice of our gratitude does not go unheard. It
speaks most clearly as we walk the path of recovery, selflessly giving to
those we meet along the way. We venture forth on our spiritual journey,
our lives enriched, our spirits awakened, and our horizons ever-expand-
ing. The quintessential spirit that lies inside each one of us, the spark
of life that was almost extinguished by our disease, has been renewed
through working the Twelve Steps of Narcotics Anonymous. It is on the
path paved with these steps that our future journey begins.

                                Step Twelve                          89




                           BOOK TWO

               The Twelve Traditions

The traditions portion of It Works: How and Why serves as a resource
for NA groups and the individual member. The book seeks to ex-
plore the spiritual principles within the traditions, engage members
with the spirit--not the law--of the traditions, and provide a basis
for thought and discussion about the traditions. This portion of the
book is not meant to fulfill every need for every group or every mem-
ber; rather, it is to be a book that will generate discussion and allow
for local interpretation of the practical application of the principles
contained in the traditions.

                                Tradition One                         91


                      TRADITION ONE

                   "Our common welfare should come first;
                  personal recovery depends on NA unity."

    Narcotics Anonymous is more than just the first meeting we at-
tend or the other NA meetings in our neighborhood. We are part of
a much greater whole. Addicts apply the principles of Narcotics
Anonymous in their personal recovery across town and around the
world. Just as we learned in early recovery that we need each other
to stay clean, we come to believe that all of us, every NA meeting
and group, are interdependent. We share an equal membership in
NA, and we all have an interest in maintaining the unity that under-
lies its common welfare. Unity is the spirit that joins thousands of
members around the world in a spiritual fellowship that has the power
to change lives.
    One way to look at placing our common welfare first is to say
that each of us is equally responsible for NA's well-being. In our re-
covery, we have found that living clean is very difficult without the
support of other members. Our individual recovery depends on meet-
ings that take place regularly, other recovering addicts who partici-
pate, and sponsors who share with us how to stay clean. Even
members who can't get to meetings depend on the support of fel-
low addicts, maintaining contact with phone calls, letters, and NA
loner groups. As each individual member relies on the support of
the fellowship for survival, so NA's survival depends on its members.
    Our First Tradition encourages not only our members but our
groups to place our common welfare first. Most groups conduct most
of their affairs on their own. In attending to the details of their week
in, week out routines, autonomous NA groups may lose sight of the
bigger picture. In the larger frame, each group is a strand in the sup-
porting fabric of Narcotics Anonymous as a whole; without that fabric,



                                     91

92                              It Works


there would be no NA. The importance of our unity encourages our
groups to look beyond their own little worlds to the common needs
of the worldwide NA Fellowship, placing the welfare of the whole be-
fore their own.
    The relationship described in the First Tradition is reciprocal.
Groups work together in a spirit of cooperation to ensure the sur-
vival of Narcotics Anonymous; in turn, those groups receive strength
and support from every other group and all our services. The strength
of our mutual commitment to NA creates the unity that binds us to-
gether in spite of all that might divide us. The common welfare of
NA depends on the continued growth and well-being of the fellow-
ship in every corner of the world.
    Our shared commitment to recovery and to our common welfare
gives us a personal stake in the unity of NA. In meetings, we find a
new place to belong, new friends, and a hope for a better life. A feel-
ing of care and concern grows between us and the group. We learn
to treat others with kindness and respect and do what we can to sup-
port each other and our group. Sometimes we comfort each other
merely by being present; at other times, a phone call or letter simply
to say hello can make a world of difference. Our relationships with
other addicts are a source of strength in our personal recovery. We
come to rely on meetings and on each other for that support. The
unity we see in our meetings is an expression not only of our reli-
ance on each other but our mutual reliance on spiritual principles
and a Higher Power.
    NA unity begins with our recognition of the therapeutic value of
one addict helping another. We help each other in different ways.
Sometimes we help each other one-on-one, as in sponsorship, or we
may help each other by participating in the formation of new meet-
ings to make NA accessible to more addicts. Many groups are formed
when members of a more established group decide to start another
meeting. Sharing the responsibility enhances our common welfare

                               Tradition One                        93


and creates unity among NA members who work together. Groups
flourish with the loving support of addicts helping addicts. We
strengthen our unity by participating in each other's recovery.
     The unity described in our First Tradition is not the same thing
as uniformity. Our membership is richly varied, made up of many ad-
dicts from widely differing backgrounds. These members bring with
them a variety of ideas and talents. That diversity enriches the fel-
lowship and gives rise to new and creative ways to reach addicts who
need our help. Our purpose--to carry the message to the addict who
still suffers--allows room for everyone to serve. When we unite in
support of this purpose, our differences need no longer detract from
our common welfare. Working together for our mutual well-being is
a significant source of unity in Narcotics Anonymous.
     While we often think of unity as a feeling or a condition, unity
doesn't just "happen." The unity underlying our common welfare re-
quires personal commitment and responsible action. For example,
when we accept personal responsibility for supporting our home
group, we further NA unity and enhance the common welfare of the
whole fellowship. Our commitment to unity strengthens our groups,
allowing us to carry a message of hope. Meetings flourish in this at-
mosphere of hope. The fellowship grows and our common welfare
increases as a result of our united efforts.
     Communication goes a long way toward building and enhancing
our common welfare. With an attitude of open-mindedness, we seek
to understand other perspectives. Reports may tell us a lot about
what's happening in other groups or areas, but our common welfare
depends on more than just information. True communication involves
an effort on our part to "listen" as we read or hear reports, seeking a
better understanding of the needs and problems of both our own
group and other groups, wherever they may be. Encouraging each
member to speak openly from the heart enhances our ability to work
together. Regular reports, thorough discussion, and active listening

94                              It Works


lead us to the kind of understanding that helps us find creative solu-
tions that benefit us all.
    Today's decisions may affect tomorrow's members. When we
think of solutions to our current problems, it's not hard to consider
the needs of our group, our area, our region, or even the worldwide
fellowship. But it's also important to remember the "unseen mem-
bers" in our discussions--the members yet to come. When we work
to ensure the vitality of NA, we're not working just for ourselves but
for those yet to join us.
    The unity that supports our common welfare is created not only
by working together but by playing together. The friendships we de-
velop outside meetings strengthen NA unity. Fellowship activities pro-
vide opportunities for us to relax, socialize with each other, and have
fun. Conventions, dinners, and holiday celebrations give us a chance
to celebrate our recovery while practicing social skills. Picnics, dances,
and sports days, for example, often allow our families to participate,
too. We strengthen our sense of community when we share more
than just meeting time. Stronger relationships develop as we become
more involved in each other's lives. The care and understanding born
of these relationships are strong threads in the fabric of NA unity.


Applying spiritual principles
    In the Twelve Steps of NA, we learn to apply principles to better
our lives. Moved by the miracle of personal recovery, we reach out
to share that miracle with others. This is the essence of being of
service in NA. In supporting our unity, we first apply principles to
guide our own behavior. As groups, we use the same principles for
guidance. That guidance engenders a sense of unity that strength-
ens our ability to reach out to others, enhancing our common wel-
fare. Some of the principles that seem particularly important to unity
include surrender and acceptance, commitment, selflessness, love,

                               Tradition One                        95


and anonymity. As we practice these principles, we will find others
that strengthen unity as well.
    Surrender and acceptance open the door to unity. As our trust
in a Higher Power grows, it gets easier to let go of our personal de-
sires and stop fighting for what we want. With an attitude of surren-
der, working together in a group becomes easier. Tradition One
presents a picture of addicts working together worldwide to support
each other's recovery. We try to remember this goal in all our ac-
tions, as individuals or as groups. If we find that our personal de-
sires or the aims of our group conflict with that ideal, unity asks us
to surrender our own desires and accept guidance that enhances the
greater good of Narcotics Anonymous. Only by deciding to be part
of that whole can we support the unity so essential to our personal
survival.
    Commitment is another essential ingredient in unity. Personal
commitment to our shared sense of purpose is one of the ties that
bind us together. When we know that we belong in NA, and when
we make a commitment to stay, we become a part of the greater
whole. Our sense of belonging is closely related to our degree of
commitment to recovery in NA. As groups, the combined strength
of that commitment is a powerful force in serving others. With that
strong commitment, we are able to carry the message of hope that
will support us all in our recovery.
    Commitment is a decision supported by our belief in NA as a way
of life. Regular meeting attendance is one of the ways in which we
live out that belief. Greeting newcomers as they arrive or giving our
telephone number to someone who needs help also reflects our de-
cision. Sponsorship, sharing in meetings, setting up chairs before a
meeting--all these are ways in which we express our commitment.
Each member finds a level of service that fits comfortably into a bal-
anced program of recovery.

96                                It Works


    Selflessness is another indispensable element in unity. The prin-
ciples we learn in the steps help us let go of our selfishness and lov-
ingly serve the needs of others. To keep our groups healthy, we place
the needs of our group ahead of our own personal desires. The same
principle applies to our affairs as a group. Setting aside what we may
want as a group, we think about the needs of the fellowship and seek
ways to support our common good. Our ability to survive as a fel-
lowship and to reach others depends on our unity.
    Love is a principle that is expressed in the practice of goodwill
toward one another. We contribute to unity in our meetings by exer-
cising loving care in the way we speak and the way we treat one an-
other. We try to share our experience, strength, and hope in a way
which demonstrates that recovery is available in Narcotics Anony-
mous. An atmosphere of love and care in our meetings helps mem-
bers feel comfortable and safe. The love we show each other attracts
newcomers and strengthens us all, fueling our sense of unity and com-
mon welfare.
    Anonymity, the spiritual foundation of our traditions, supports NA
unity as well. When we apply anonymity to the First Tradition, we
overlook the differences that would separate us. In the context of
unity, anonymity means that the message of recovery is for every ad-
dict who wants it. We learn to set aside our prejudices and focus on
our common identity as addicts. Each of us has an equal right to
and responsibility for the well-being of Narcotics Anonymous.
    Just as anonymity is the spiritual foundation of our traditions, the
unity spoken of in the First Tradition is the practical foundation on
which we may build strong and successful groups. Each succeeding
tradition builds upon the strength of our unity as a fellowship, re-
calling the vital importance of the common welfare to each individual
member and group. With unity as our practical foundation, we find
that our relationship with one another is more important than any
issue that may arise to divide us. No problem or disagreement is

                                Tradition One                         97


more significant than our need for each other's support. The funda-
mental importance of our common welfare strengthens our under-
standing of all the other traditions. Many questions can be answered
simply by determining how the action we contemplate will affect the
unity of the fellowship. Will it serve to divide us, or will it bring us
closer together?
    Unity is the spirit that joins members around the world in a spiri-
tual fellowship that has the power to change lives. By striving to see
beyond our individual ideas and the interests of our own group, we
come to understand that the common welfare of all NA must come
first. Through our trust in a loving Higher Power, we find the strength
to work together toward our shared goal of recovery from addiction.
In the unity that grows in trust, we are ready to work together for our
common good.

98                                 It Works


                      TRADITION TWO

         "For our group purpose there is but one ultimate authority--
       a loving God as He may express Himself in our group conscience.
          Our leaders are but trusted servants; they do not govern."

    Tradition Two builds on the practical foundation of Tradition One.
We begin with unity, founded on the strength of our commitment to
recovery in Narcotics Anonymous. Our commitment is reflected in
service that builds our common welfare: supporting a meeting, shar-
ing with other members, sponsorship, any of the ways in which we
reach out to other addicts. As groups, too, our purpose is to serve,
to carry the message. Everything we do in service to NA is related
to that purpose. Without direction, however, our services might lack
consistency. To guide us in serving others, we seek direction from a
Higher Power.
    Personal service arises from the application of principles. Ideally,
personal service is founded in a relationship with the same Higher
Power that guides our personal recovery. This Higher Power also
guides the various elements of our fellowship. Our direction in ser-
vice comes from a God of our understanding, whether we serve as
individuals, as a group, or as a service board or committee. When-
ever we come together, we seek the presence and guidance of this
loving Higher Power. This direction then guides us through all our
actions.
    Everybody has opinions on how to serve more effectively. When
we each propose a different plan for any course of action, how do
we choose among them? Who has the final say in our discussions?
Our answer is that a loving God, the source of our unity, has the final
say--the same Higher Power that guides our personal recovery.
    If we are to find guidance from an ultimate authority, we need to
find means of hearing that guidance together. The mechanism we



                                      98

                                 Tradition Two                           99


use is group conscience. The success of the group conscience pro-
cess depends on our willingness as individuals to seek guidance from
a Higher Power on a personal level. We then bring that willingness
into the group setting.
     Something happens when we practice the steps and learn to ap-
ply principles in our individual lives. We develop an awareness of our
behavior and its effects on ourselves and others. In other words, we
develop a conscience. This conscience is a reflection of our rela-
tionship with a Higher Power. It reflects the guidance we receive from
the God of our understanding and our commitment to follow that
guidance. Whenever we come together in our groups, a similar pro-
cess may occur: A collective conscience develops. That conscience
reflects the relationship of our members to a loving Higher Power. When
consulted regularly, that collective conscience guides us in fulfilling our
primary purpose while preserving our unity and common welfare.
     Group conscience can be thought of in much the same way as
personal conscience. Group conscience reflects a collective aware-
ness of, understanding of, and surrender to spiritual principles. The
conscience of a group takes shape and is revealed when its mem-
bers take the time to talk with each other about their personal needs,
the needs of that group, and the needs of NA as a whole. Each mem-
ber draws upon his or her relationship with a Higher Power when shar-
ing with the group. As members listen carefully to each other and
consult their personal understanding of a loving God, something hap-
pens: Solutions to problems become apparent, solutions that take
into consideration the needs of everyone concerned. In developing
a group conscience, a clear mutual understanding or consensus arises.
Based upon the understanding gained by sharing group conscience,
a group may move on to a vote in order to make decisions. In the
best of circumstances, however, the group continues discussion un-
til it reaches unanimity. The resulting solution may be so obvious
that no vote is needed.

100                                It Works


    Group conscience is not fixed and inflexible. We know that per-
sonal conscience changes as an individual's relationship with a Higher
Power grows and strengthens. In the same way, the conscience of a
group evolves as its members mature in recovery, new members ar-
rive, and the group's situation changes.
    Group conscience is a process that may work differently under
differing circumstances. It's not reasonable to expect that today's
solution to one group's needs will always be sufficient for every group;
in fact, that solution may not even apply to the same group at a dif-
ferent time. The principles involved in group conscience are always
the same, but the times and conditions our conscience guides us
through are constantly changing, requiring our conscience to tell us
different things in different settings. It's important for us to continue
cultivating our group conscience, seeking the guidance of a loving
Higher Power whenever a question arises.
    A surrender to group conscience means we allow our fellowship
to be shaped by a loving Higher Power. We are tempted sometimes
to take control of the daily affairs of our group, our service board, or
our committee, believing that our great concern for the fellowship's
welfare could never lead us astray. However, as we become more
trusting, we realize that the group is directed by a loving Higher Power.
Our reliance on that Higher Power is demonstrated by our willingness
to carry out the direction expressed in our group conscience, believ-
ing that all will be well.
    Any group, board, or committee can become bogged down in dis-
agreement or sidetracked by seemingly insurmountable problems. In
these situations, it's important to focus our attention on the prin-
ciples of the program and the solutions they point toward, not on
our problems. Agreement is reached when we step out of the way
and allow a loving Higher Power to direct us.
    Only when we listen for the direction of a Higher Power are we
able to hear it. The conscience of a group is most clearly expressed

                                Tradition Two                          101


when every member is considered an equal. A Higher Power works
through all of us, regardless of clean time or experience. Group con-
science always exists, but we are not always willing or able to hear it
or allow its expression. Hearing group conscience may take time and
patience. A flexible approach invites a loving Higher Power into our
group conscience process.
    In our personal recovery, our thoughts and actions change as we
stay clean and grow spiritually. We don't get better overnight, and
sometimes our growth is sporadic and uneven. This same pattern of
growth and maturation also occurs in our fellowship. As our groups
grow and evolve, our resources change and so do our needs. Groups
may change trusted servants, meeting format, or location, depend-
ing on their resources and their needs; service committees may ex-
pand their subcommittees, reach out into new territories, or combine
their efforts with other committees. These changes may not always
feel like progress. Just as our personal recovery doesn't always de-
velop in an orderly fashion, our fellowship doesn't always evolve as
we would expect. As groups and committees go through this grow-
ing process, their collective conscience often evolves as well. Changes
in the group conscience are not a cause for alarm, merely part of the
growing process.
    When a group or committee has sought direction from a loving
Higher Power, it may ask some of its members to help carry out that
direction. When we ask members to serve, we don't set them apart
as being somehow better than the rest of us. Leadership in NA is a
service, not a class of membership. For this reason, we call our lead-
ers trusted servants.
    When we choose a member to serve us in some capacity, we ex-
ercise mutual trust. We trust the conscience that influenced our se-
lection since it reflects our collective relationship with a loving Higher
Power. We extend that trust to the members we have selected to
serve. We have faith that they will apply principles in their actions,

102                               It Works


seek and share the most complete information available, and work
to further the group's well-being and our fellowship's common wel-
fare. The relationship of trusted servants to the group is reciprocal:
Members chosen to serve are asked to do so with dedication and
fidelity, and those who've chosen them are responsible to support
their servants.
    When we are asked to serve, we understand that we are respon-
sible to a loving Higher Power as expressed in the group conscience.
We acknowledge this responsibility when we approach service with a
selfless and loving attitude. The principles embodied in the tradi-
tions apply to all our actions. We can look to our individual con-
science as well as the collective conscience for guidance in all we
must do in fulfilling our responsibilities.
    This connection with the group conscience is enhanced when, as
trusted servants, we carry a continuous flow of information that is
honest and open; it is further strengthened when we seek to serve,
not to govern. We help form the conscience of our group or commit-
tee, through the direction of a Higher Power, by presenting a complete
and unbiased stream of information. The ideas and direction of the
group, then, are conveyed in our representation of that conscience.
    Our trusted servants lead us best when they lead by personal ex-
ample. Ideally, we choose them for the principles of recovery we see
at work in their lives. We encourage our trusted servants to remain
open to new ideas, to become knowledgeable about all aspects of
service in NA, and to continue to seek personal recovery. All of these
attributes are essential to their ability to serve us well.


Applying spiritual principles
    We noted earlier in this chapter that personal service arises from
the practice of principles. By applying these principles, we learn to
seek direction. We talk to our sponsor, share with our NA friends,

                                Tradition Two                       103


and listen for a Higher Power's guidance. Some of the principles that
seem to be important in Tradition Two include surrender, faith, hu-
mility, open-mindedness, integrity, and anonymity.
    We begin with surrender to our ultimate authority, the God of our
understanding, with whom we have developed a personal relation-
ship. In this case, we surrender to the direction of that Higher Power
as it is revealed in our group conscience. We renew our commitment
to the common welfare of NA when we place the needs of the fel-
lowship ahead of our own desires.
    Faith is our reliance on a loving Higher Power put into action. The
application of this spiritual principle lets us surrender to the group
conscience with hope instead of fear. It is a constant reminder that
our direction comes from a Power greater than our own. Faith de-
mands courage, since we often practice an active demonstration of
faith in spite of our anxiety. Our faith is strengthened through the
experience of seeing a loving Higher Power work in our fellowship.
    Humility in practice is the honest assessment of our strengths and
weaknesses. That kind of assessment is a necessary ingredient in
our willingness to surrender. Humility prepares us to set aside our
personal wishes so that we can effectively serve our fellowship. We
look to humility, first, to remind us that we aren't personally capable
of guiding the affairs of Narcotics Anonymous. We are reminded of
our source of strength: a loving Higher Power.
    By practicing humility in our efforts to serve, we make room for
open-mindedness. We remember that, just as we need the experi-
ence of other addicts to recover, so do we need their direction and
ideas in order to serve. We learn to actively cultivate our listening
skills, using our ears more than our mouths in conversation. When
we are open-minded, we hear and accept solutions offered by oth-
ers in the development of group conscience. Application of this prin-
ciple teaches us to set aside our prejudices in order to work with
others. By practicing open-mindedness, we nurture an attitude of

104                              It Works


goodwill toward others and become willing to serve with our com-
mon good in mind. Only with an open mind can we recognize the
guidance of a loving Higher Power.
    Integrity is the consistent application of spiritual principles, no
matter what the circumstances. Leaders who demonstrate this quality
inspire our trust. We serve best when we display an honest respect
for the trust placed in us by others. Fidelity and devotion to that
trust reflect the personal integrity of our servants. When we choose
members to serve us, we often look for integrity as a sign that they
are trustworthy.
    The spiritual principle of anonymity reminds us that we are all
equal in Narcotics Anonymous. No one member or group has a mo-
nopoly on the knowledge of a Higher Power's will. We practice ano-
nymity by offering our love, attention, and respect to everyone,
regardless of our personal feelings toward any individual. Every mem-
ber has a part in the development of group conscience. We are all
equal in the expression of a conscious contact with a Higher Power
of our understanding.
    Tradition Two offers guidance for our relationships with others.
A loving Higher Power is the source of direction for NA as a whole.
This Higher Power is also the source of the principles that we apply
when we serve. We can use these principles when we seek direction
as individuals, groups, service boards, or committees.
    Service is for those we serve. Our best talent in service is the
ability to reach other addicts, offer identification and welcome, greet
the addict walking in the door for the first time, and help ensure that
newcomers return again and again. Any one of us is capable of of-
fering that service. With the guidance of a loving Higher Power, we
become better able to help others.
    Service to the Fellowship of Narcotics Anonymous has its own re-
wards. When we practice spiritual principles in our daily lives, a stronger
relationship with our Higher Power develops. Our relationship with our

                             Tradition Two                         105


group and the fellowship grows stronger, too. Service in NA is a learn-
ing experience that allows us personal growth. We begin to look be-
yond our own interests, setting aside our self-centered view of life in
order to better serve the whole. We benefit spiritually in return for
our unselfish service.

106                               It Works


                   TRADITION THREE

       "The only requirement for membership is a desire to stop using."

    Narcotics Anonymous offers recovery to addicts around the world.
We focus on the disease of addiction rather than any particular drug.
Our message is broad enough to attract addicts from any social class
or nationality. When new members come to meetings, our sole in-
terest is in their desire for freedom from active addiction and how
we can be of help.
    The Third Tradition helps NA offer recovery to so many addicts
by freeing us from having to make judgments about prospective mem-
bers. It eliminates the need for membership committees or applica-
tions. We are not asked to make decisions about anyone's fitness
for recovery. Since the only requirement for membership is a desire
to stop using, we as members have no reason to judge each other.
    Desire is not a measurable commodity. It lives in the heart of
each individual member. Because we can't judge the sole require-
ment for membership, we are encouraged to open wide the doors of
our meetings to any addict who wishes to join. We are asked to ex-
tend to others the care and concern that helped each of us find a
sense of belonging. The Third Tradition helps NA grow by encourag-
ing us to welcome others.
    Membership is a personal decision reached by each individual.
We can do a lot to allow addicts the freedom to make that decision
and reaffirm their commitment to recovery. We can help them feel
comfortable in our groups by greeting them at the door, sharing with
other addicts before or after the meeting, and exchanging telephone
numbers. We try to make sure that any addict who attends our meet-
ing is not turned away. To the extent that it's possible, we choose
the most accessible location for our meetings. We may choose a for-
mat that reflects an invitational tone. Most of all, we encourage ev-
ery addict to keep coming back.

                                    106

                               Tradition Three                       107


    The strength of any member's desire is not necessarily connected
to any outside circumstance. What makes one addict stay clean while
another returns to using? No one of us can judge who will stay to
recover and who will return to active addiction. There are no guar-
antees based on types of drugs used or using history. We cannot pre-
dict a higher success rate for addicts of a certain age, or those who
used for a certain number of years, or women over men, or any other
external factor. Just as we are not capable of measuring another's
desire to stay clean, neither are we equipped to decide who should
join. We are free to offer welcome instead of judgment.
    We look for ways to help instead of judge. Our task is to fan the
flame of desire, not dampen it. Any addict who walks into a meet-
ing, even a using addict, displays a level of willingness that cannot
be discounted. While maintaining an emphasis on the importance
of total abstinence, still-using addicts are welcomed into our meet-
ings with special encouragement to keep coming back. Many recov-
ering addicts do not have access to regular meetings because of
incarceration, geography, physical disability, or employment. These
addicts are members in every respect as long as they have the de-
sire to stop using, and they are entitled to the same consideration
and support as any other member.
    Addicts attend their first meeting for many reasons. Our motives
for coming to NA aren't particularly important. The desire to stop
using may not be clearly realized; it may be no more than a subtle
yearning for relief from pain. But that yearning often drives us to seek
solutions we might otherwise never consider. Often the experience
of hearing other addicts share about recovery will ignite the desire
to stop using. Others come to a meeting, hear the message, and
return to active addiction. Those who return to meetings after re-
lapse often say their desire to stop using was born from the pain of
relapse. We come to NA for many reasons, but we stay to recover
when we find and keep the desire to stop using.

108                              It Works


    The group is not the jury of desire. We cannot measure or arbi-
trate willingness. Any addict's willingness to come to a meeting ought
to be a sufficient indication of desire. It may take a while for an ad-
dict to find the desire that will keep her or him in Narcotics Anony-
mous. No addict should be denied an opportunity to stay long
enough to develop that desire. We can nurture that desire with lov-
ing acceptance.
    The wording of the Third Tradition reflects the broad focus of our
First Step. It's written simply enough to include addicts of all coun-
tries and cultures, no matter what drugs they used. Before finding
recovery in NA, many addicts don't think that alcohol is a problem.
Others abuse prescription medication, thinking that "legal" drugs are
okay. Because of the wording of this tradition, we are able to attract
and welcome addicts who might think they didn't use the "right" drugs
to qualify for membership in NA. Each addict should be allowed to
decide if NA is the answer for him or herself. We cannot make the
decision for others.
    Although the Third Tradition is written simply, we know that when
it talks about "a desire to stop using," it means using drugs. We un-
derstand that NA is a program of recovery for drug addicts. Although
addiction takes on a broader meaning for many of us as we continue
in recovery, it's important to remember that we first came to NA be-
cause of our drug problems. If new members are to feel that they
belong in NA, they need to hear something they can identify with.
They find that identification in the fellowship of recovering addicts
in Narcotics Anonymous.
    Many of us know when we walk into our first meeting that we're
addicts. It's not something we have to decide; it's just a fact of life.
Membership, however, means more than just being an addict; it
means making a decision. If we identify with what we hear in NA and
relate with the people we meet, we will want what NA offers. So long
as we have a desire to stop using, we are free to make the decision

                              Tradition Three                         109


to join Narcotics Anonymous. Then, once we've made that decision,
we need to follow it with a commitment to the principles of NA. With
that commitment, we set ourselves squarely on the road of recovery.


Applying spiritual principles
    The Third Tradition encourages freedom from judgment. It leads
us on the path of service toward an attitude of helpfulness, accep-
tance, and unconditional love. As we've seen in the previous tradi-
tions, our path of service arises from the application of principles.
Some of the principles that support this tradition include tolerance,
compassion, anonymity, and humility.
    Tolerance reminds us that judgment is not our task. The disease
of addiction does not exclude anyone. NA, likewise, cannot exclude
any addict who desires to stop using. We learn to be tolerant of ad-
dicts from different backgrounds than ours, remembering that we are
not better than any other addict in a meeting.
    Addiction is a deadly disease. We know that addicts who don't
find recovery can expect nothing better than jails, institutions, and
death. Refusing admission to any addict, even one who comes merely
out of curiosity, may be a death sentence for that addict. We learn
to practice tolerance of addicts who don't look like us, think like us,
or share like us. We teach by example. Pressuring new members to
talk or act like we do may send them back to the streets. It certainly
denies them the right to recover and learn in their own way.
    Compassion lends kindness to all our efforts in service to oth-
ers. With compassion as the foundation of our actions, we learn to
support members through any difficulties they may experience. All
too often, we are quick to judge the quality of another's recovery or will-
ingness. Tradition Three asks us to set aside our self-righteousness.
Because the only requirement for membership is a quality we can-
not measure, the right to judge another's desire is denied us. Our

110                             It Works


attitude ought to be one of loving acceptance toward all addicts, re-
gardless of any other problems they may experience. Generous ap-
plication of compassion is more therapeutic to the suffering addict
than a free application of judgment.
    Humility reminds us that we are not God; we cannot predict
another's readiness to hear the message. We try to remember our
own fear and confusion in our first meeting. We need each other's
help and encouragement, not criticism or rejection. Our awareness
of our own shortcomings, exercised in humility, helps us remember
this. The self-acceptance that often accompanies humility makes us
reluctant to judge others harshly.
    Anonymity is the principle that supports the openness of our
groups and our freedom to welcome everyone as equals. NA has no
classes of membership and no second-class members. The common
denominator in NA is the disease of addiction. We are all equally
subject to its devastation. We share an equal right to recovery.
    The practice of anonymity ensures the integrity of Tradition Three.
In the spirit of anonymity, we remember that no individual member
or group is more important than the message we carry. The single
requirement for membership helps ensure that no addict need die
without having a chance to recover. We celebrate our equality and
the freedom we share by welcoming any addict who has the desire
to stop using.
    Tradition Three spells freedom for the members of NA. It sets
the sole requirement for membership in the heart of each individual
member. We don't have to decide for anyone else. We don't have
to expend time and energy on deciding who should stay or who we
should help. Instead, we are free to extend loving assistance to any-
one who walks into a meeting desiring freedom from addiction.

                                   Tradition Four                        111


                      TRADITION FOUR

                     "Each group should be autonomous,
           except in matters affecting other groups or NA as a whole."

    NA groups have a great deal of freedom. We've already seen in
Tradition Three that groups are free of any need to screen their mem-
bers or set requirements for membership. Our NA groups are free to
offer recovery to any addict. The Fourth Tradition enhances that free-
dom, allowing the rich diversity of our varied experience to help us serve.
    Freedom can be exhilarating. Many of us have little experience
with freedom of any sort. Our lives in active addiction often seemed
more like slavery. When we first experience the freedom of recovery,
we may find it overwhelming. Through working the steps, we learn
that with freedom comes responsibility. In recovery, we become re-
sponsible for ourselves. As we accept that responsibility, we see how
the Fourth Tradition encourages us to act responsibly as groups and
as a fellowship.
    NA groups are vehicles for the message of recovery. In the
strength of the personal commitment group members make to one
another, a group character forms. As this group character grows and
evolves, the group finds ways in which it can do what no other group
in town may be doing. The members of each group design a blue-
print for meetings that reflect that particular group's personality.
    Group autonomy gives groups the creative freedom to find indi-
vidual ways to carry the message. NA is made up of a vastly diverse
assortment of addicts joined together by the strength of their mu-
tual commitment to recovery. We speak many different languages and
live in differing cultures; one type of meeting will not appeal to every
addict who comes to Narcotics Anonymous. In order to reach every
addict who may need our help and support the recovery of every
member, groups have the freedom to vary their format and other



                                       111

112                               It Works


meeting characteristics. Each group has the freedom to pursue our
primary purpose in the manner it feels will work best.
     Every group has a niche to fill, both in the fellowship as a whole
and in the local NA community. As a fellowship, our ability to reach
still-using addicts is tied to our willingness to offer meetings that are
accessible and attractive to those addicts. With the creative free-
dom offered by autonomy, we are encouraged to seek the particular
role that meets the needs of both the NA community and our own
group. We are free to make each group the very best it can be. The
vitality of Narcotics Anonymous is enhanced by each group's will-
ingness to find its niche and fill it.
     Creative freedom challenges the groups to be strong and respon-
sible. Members may support many meetings with their attendance,
but most make a commitment to support one group in particular.
Members grow in their personal recovery when they take responsi-
bility for their lives. In the same way, groups grow and become stron-
ger when their members take collective responsibility for maintaining
their meetings. Groups reflect the responsibility and commitment of
their members.
     One of the most common ways in which groups express their au-
tonomy is in the choice of meeting format. Most NA communities
will offer a number of different types of meetings, from speaker meet-
ings to step studies to topic discussions or any other format or com-
bination of formats that meets the needs of local members. Some
meetings will be open to the public, while others will be for addicts
only. Larger communities may offer several different types of meet-
ings each night. Some addicts will hear the message of recovery bet-
ter in one type of meeting, while others prefer another format. An
NA community that offers a variety of meetings is more likely to reach
a broad cross-section of addicts. In a spirit of cooperation, we try
to respect the autonomy of other groups by allowing them the free-
dom to carry the message in whatever manner seems best to them.

                              Tradition Four                          113


    In the spirit of autonomy, many groups hold meetings that ap-
peal to members with similar needs. The freedom from judgment ex-
pressed in the Third Tradition is aimed at helping any addict,
anywhere, feel comfortable in NA. No matter how a group structures
its meetings, all NA groups are encouraged to keep the focus of their
meetings on recovery from the disease of addiction. As long as a
group observes the Twelve Traditions and espouses the Twelve Steps
of NA in its meetings, it may consider them Narcotics Anonymous
meetings.
    Sometimes it's hard to know what affects NA as a whole. The
Fourth Tradition offers a way to balance the freedom of autonomy
with our responsibility to preserve NA unity. We are challenged in
Tradition Four to apply autonomy in ways that will enhance the growth
and vitality of NA. Autonomy encourages groups to become strong
and lively but also reminds them that they are a vital part of a greater
whole: the Fellowship of Narcotics Anonymous. We consider our com-
mon welfare when we make decisions in our groups.
    Since most groups are not directly connected with each other,
we might think that whatever happens in our meetings has no effect
on anyone else. When we consider who is affected by our group, we
have to look at other groups, the addict yet to come, the newcomer,
and the neighborhood in which we hold our meetings. We have an
effect on other groups or NA as a whole if we're not recognizable as
an NA meeting. It helps to remember what we needed to hear when
we were new: hope for recovery from drug addiction. Addicts first
coming to NA often look closely for differences, hoping that some-
how they won't fit in. It's not difficult to alienate an addict. It's im-
portant to think about the message we send to newcomers in our
meetings. Thoughtful consideration of our primary purpose may help
ensure that meetings will be available for those addicts yet to come.
    It's also important to consider how we're viewed by society. When
NA meetings first began in many places, it was illegal for addicts to

114                               It Works


meet under any circumstances. Even where meetings are legal, the
public often views groups of addicts with alarm. Until NA has estab-
lished a good public reputation, it may be difficult for addicts to find
meeting places. If our behavior as NA members is still destructive
and selfish, we will once again have difficulty meeting openly. We help
protect our reputation as a fellowship when we use our meeting fa-
cilities with respect, keeping them clean and in good repair. We should
take care to act like good neighbors, conducting ourselves respect-
fully. Even something as simple as the name a group chooses may
reflect on NA as a whole. If the public reputation of Narcotics Anony-
mous is somehow impaired, addicts may die.
     Autonomy does not relieve groups of their obligation to observe
and apply the spiritual principles embodied in the traditions. Care-
ful consideration of the group's observation of the Fourth Tradition
often takes the form of a group inventory, helping members gauge
their success at carrying the message and reaching addicts in their
neighborhood. At the same time, groups can examine their part in
contributing to the unity of NA as a whole. The Fourth Tradition
guides us away from self-centeredness by giving us the freedom to
act responsibly as groups.


Applying spiritual principles
     The Fourth Tradition helps groups achieve a balance between in-
dependence and responsibility. This mirrors the freedom of the indi-
vidual recovering member and the responsibility which supports that
freedom. Together with open-mindedness, unity, and anonymity, these
principles help protect NA as a whole when applied in our group affairs.
     While autonomy gives us certain freedoms, it also implies respon-
sibility for our actions and for the continued well-being of NA.
As groups, we exercise our responsibility to the fellowship by taking
inventory of our behavior and how we hold meetings. Our group

                              Tradition Four                       115


exercises its autonomy in a responsible way when it takes care to con-
sider the common welfare of the fellowship as a whole before it acts.
    Open-mindedness is essential if we are to use autonomy to help
NA grow. With an open-minded attitude, we are more receptive to
new ways of reaching addicts. We learn to find and fill our niche in
the NA community. We encourage each member of the group to con-
tribute thoughts and ideas. Our attitude of open-mindedness helps
us remember that each group is part of a greater whole. Acknowl-
edging that we are part of something bigger than ourselves prompts
us to look at still more new ideas. Our diversity can enrich us only
when we are open to its richness.
    Remembering our part in the greater whole, we consider unity
when we think about applying the Fourth Tradition. Any decision that
we make as an autonomous group ought to be founded first in our
common welfare. Although we are autonomous, we may offer lov-
ing support to other groups by attending their meetings or offering
other help. NA meetings thrive when groups look beyond their im-
mediate needs to offer help to each other.
    Love is the principle that guides us to see NA as a greater whole.
This impacts our responsibility as autonomous groups. Our group's
autonomous decisions, based on our love for NA, will serve to
strengthen our efforts to serve others. Love encourages us to reach
out to other members and other groups, finding ways to cooperate
with them in carrying the message of recovery.
    Anonymity applied to the Fourth Tradition reminds us that each
group has an equal place in the Fellowship of NA. Larger groups are
not more important than smaller groups; older groups are not "bet-
ter" than newer groups. While all groups have the freedom to apply
principles in whatever ways seem best to them, those same principles
make each group an equal partner in recovery. Each group bears an
equal responsibility in the work and in the reputation of NA.

116                             It Works


    Autonomy in NA gives groups the freedom to act on their own
to establish an atmosphere of recovery, serve their members, and fulfill
our primary purpose. The responsibility that balances our autonomy
reflects the principles expressed in the first three traditions. Preserv-
ing the unity of the NA Fellowship comes first. Next, we seek direc-
tion from a loving Higher Power. Then, we hold meetings that
welcome everyone with a desire to stop using.
    Healthy, vital groups are essential to the growth of Narcotics
Anonymous. Groups provide a place where we can offer our most
basic service: one addict reaching out to another with the message
of recovery. Without our autonomous groups, we would be unable
to fulfill our primary purpose.

                                Tradition Five                         117


                      TRADITION FIVE

                "Each group has but one primary purpose--
             to carry the message to the addict who still suffers."

    Our primary purpose is at the heart of our service. With guid-
ance from a loving Higher Power and a clear focus on this pur-
pose, NA groups become a channel for the healing power of
recovery. Narcotics Anonymous exists to help addicts find free-
dom from active addiction. If we were to espouse other ideas or
pursue other goals, our focus would be blurred and our energies
diminished. The Fifth Tradition asks us to practice integrity by
keeping our purpose foremost.
    Tradition Five helps our groups fulfill the fundamental reason for
their existence: to carry the message to the addict who still suffers.
As we learned in the Fourth Tradition, NA groups are free to find new
and different ways of presenting meetings. This freedom is impor-
tant; it protects and encourages diversity, letting us reach addicts by
many means. In this autonomy, each group develops a character of
its own. The character of the group is not its purpose, however. The
message we carry is not our group personality but the message of
Narcotics Anonymous--the principles of recovery.
    What is the message that we are asked to carry? Groups carry
the message of NA: hope and freedom from active addiction. This
message may be voiced in many ways. Sometimes we simply share
that if we don't use any drugs, we won't get loaded. Other members
share that they have found satisfying, productive lives in recovery.
Sometimes the message we share is that, even though life may be
painful, we can stay clean. The spiritual awakening we experience
when we work the steps is also our message. When addicts experi-
ence the message of recovery, we find healing from our suffering, no
matter what the cause. We can live drug-free and establish new lives.



                                     117

118                              It Works


That is our message: that an addict, any addict, can stop using drugs,
lose the desire to use, and find a new way to live.
    The groups' focus on carrying the message is so important to the
survival of NA that it is called our primary purpose. That means it is
the most important thing we do. Nothing ought to take precedence
over it. This is the most basic guideline by which groups may exam-
ine their motives and their actions.
    There are many ways in which groups can further our primary pur-
pose. Generally speaking, group members start by creating an at-
mosphere of recovery in their meetings. This includes extending a
welcome to every addict who attends. Stable meetings that start on
time carry a message of recovery. Effective meeting formats keep the
primary purpose in focus and encourage members to participate in
a way that expresses recovery. We lead by example, sharing experi-
ence instead of advice. Group members help further our purpose
when they take personal responsibility for keeping the meeting
recovery-oriented. All of our actions convey a message, and Tradi-
tion Five reminds us to make it a message of recovery.
    There are many distracting influences that can divert us from our
primary purpose. For instance, our groups may be tempted to use
meeting time to discuss their business and finances or talk about
some controversy. As individual members, we can get caught up in
socializing with our friends, ignoring another addict who may be in
pain and needs our encouragement. But each time our focus is di-
verted from our primary purpose, the addict seeking recovery loses out.
    Other influences can distort our group's focus on its primary pur-
pose. From the money members contribute, our groups pay rent on
their meeting space, buy literature and supplies, conduct activities,
and support NA services. All of these can either help further our pri-
mary purpose or distract us from our focus. Some groups seek to
outdo others with luxurious meeting spaces, extravagant refresh-
ments, huge supplies of literature, and elaborate activities. When we

                               Tradition Five                        119


do this, our focus is distracted away from our primary purpose and
onto money, property, and prestige. We should try to establish a repu-
tation for carrying the message--nothing more, nothing less. Money,
literature, and meeting space are tools we can use to help us carry
the message; however, they should serve us, not rule us.
    The groups can provide many services to carry the message. Our
primary service is the NA meeting, where addicts share their recov-
ery directly with one another. Additional services like phonelines, pub-
lic information work, and H&I panels also help carry the message.
In rural areas and newer NA communities, groups are sometimes the
only source of such services. However, most groups find they can-
not maintain their focus on their recovery meetings and also carry
out other services. For this reason, groups usually assign responsi-
bility for such services to their area committees. That way, groups
reserve their time and energy for carrying the message directly to the
addict who still suffers.
    Because carrying the message is so important, many groups take
inventory periodically to help ensure that our primary purpose is still
in focus. The Twelve Traditions may be used as an outline for a group
inventory. Some groups use a specific set of inventory questions, such
as: How well are we carrying the message of recovery? Are there
addicts our group isn't reaching? How can we make our meetings
more accessible? What can we do to make new members feel more
at home? Has the atmosphere of recovery diminished? Would a
change in our meeting format strengthen that atmosphere?
    Considering the needs of the larger NA community may lead to
other changes. For instance, if there are no step meetings in one
town, a group may consider having meetings that focus on the steps.
There are many ways to carry the message and meet the needs of
both the group and the NA community.
    There is a power that works through this program. We tap this
power when we practice the Twelfth Step as individuals, carrying the

120                                It Works


message to other addicts. When groups carry the message, the im-
pact of the Twelfth Step is greatly multiplied. Even more impressive
than sheer numbers of recovering addicts is the unity of purpose and
the atmosphere of recovery found in meetings--a spiritual power. The
evidence of that power in the group is hard to deny. It is a power we
can draw on between meetings to stay clean.
    Tradition Five focuses the group's priority on carrying the mes-
sage. Members can do many things to further our primary purpose.
For example, we show our care and our willingness to help by taking
turns greeting people at the door, preparing lists of telephone num-
bers to distribute, or offering packets of literature to newcomers.
When members come together as a group to undertake the task of car-
rying the message, they offer an attractive picture of recovery in action.
    Many meetings are structured to carry the message to our new-
est members. These new members often need more encouragement
to stay, more answers to their questions, more of our love and care.
But the newest members are not the only addicts who need the mes-
sage of recovery. The still-suffering addict with whom we share our hope
may be any one of us, regardless of clean time. Tradition Five is not
limited to helping newcomers. The message of recovery is for all of us.


Applying spiritual principles
    The Fifth Tradition complements the Twelfth Step: It asks groups
to carry the message to addicts. As individuals, we are asked in the
steps to apply principles in all our affairs; this is also important in
our actions as groups. Some of the principles we have applied to
help us observe the Fifth Tradition include integrity, responsibility,
unity, and anonymity.
    Integrity, or fidelity to the principles embodied in the Twelve Tra-
ditions, is demonstrated when groups carry the NA message of re-
covery. Many of our members have much to offer on a variety of

                                Tradition Five                       121


subjects, but our fellowship has its own special message: freedom from
active addiction through practice of NA's Twelve Steps and the sup-
port of the fellowship of recovering addicts. Groups demonstrate this
when they offer vigorous, conscious support for addicts seeking to
work the NA program. When groups conscientiously cultivate this kind
of integrity, their meetings further our primary purpose.
    The Fifth Tradition gives our groups a great responsibility: to main-
tain our fellowship's primary purpose. Each group is responsible to
become as effective a vehicle for carrying the NA message as it can
be. Allowing our groups to lose sight of our primary purpose may
deprive an addict of a chance to hear our message of hope. Each
member is responsible to help the group keep our primary purpose
in focus.
    Unity is one of our greatest strengths in carrying the message.
Unity of purpose keeps our focus on carrying the message. As groups,
we work together to ensure not only our own personal recovery but
the recovery of every NA member. The evidence of many addicts stay-
ing clean and seeking our common good is very persuasive. We don't
recover alone.
    In anonymity, our personal differences are insignificant compared
to our primary purpose. When we come together as a group, our first
task is to carry the message; all else ought to be set aside. Groups
can practice the Fifth Tradition by reminding their members that the
recovery message, not individual personalities, is primary in Narcot-
ics Anonymous.
    Narcotics Anonymous is a fellowship with meetings around the
world. Our primary purpose is a common thread that unites us. Tra-
dition Five defines the focus of Narcotics Anonymous. This focus
also helps to ensure our survival as a fellowship. The Fifth Tradition
asks us to serve other addicts by carrying the message that recovery
is possible in Narcotics Anonymous. This concentrated focus pro-
tects the integrity of our fellowship.

122                                    It Works


                          TRADITION SIX

   "An NA group ought never endorse, finance, or lend the NA name to any
          related facility or outside enterprise, lest problems of money,
           property, or prestige divert us from our primary purpose."

    While each group has but one primary purpose, there are many
ways to fulfill that purpose. Our groups often go to great lengths to
carry the message. We carry out our primary purpose as individuals,
as groups, and through our service structure. In carrying the mes-
sage, groups come in contact with other organizations in their areas.
Good public relations can help our groups better fulfill their primary
purpose, but cooperation with other organizations can also lead to
conflict, diverting our groups from carrying the message. Tradition
Six tempers our zeal to carry the message, establishing boundaries
for our relations with others in the area.
    Our fellowship's primary purpose defines us. We are a society of
addicts sharing with others the hope of recovery in Narcotics Anony-
mous. When NA's identity becomes too closely tied to the identity
of another organization, the clarity of our primary purpose is mud-
died, losing some of its power.
    The Sixth Tradition warns us of three things that could blur the
distinction between Narcotics Anonymous and other enterprises: en-
dorsement, financing, and the lending of our name. An endorsement
is a public statement of support for another organization. Financing
another organization further endorses its purpose. Lending our name
to a related facility or outside enterprise--allowing an addiction treat-
ment facility, for example, to call itself The NA Medical Center--is
the ultimate endorsement, permanently tying our primary purpose to
theirs in the public eye.
    By establishing boundaries, the Sixth Tradition helps our groups avoid
some of the problems that commonly arise between organizations. If



                                         122

                                Tradition Six                         123


we endorse an organization that later runs into trouble, our reputa-
tion will be damaged along with theirs. If we boost an outside enter-
prise that some find obnoxious, addicts seeking recovery may be
discouraged from coming to our meetings. If we voice support for
another organization, the public, the addict who still suffers, even our
own members might confuse that organization's purpose with ours.
If we fund a related facility or outside enterprise, money that could
be used to fulfill our own primary purpose is diverted; if we later with-
draw that funding, other problems occur. If we finance or lend our
name to one organization instead of another, we can be drawn into
a conflict between the two. By helping our groups avoid such prob-
lems, Tradition Six allows us to devote all our energy to carrying a
clear NA message to addicts seeking recovery.
    We must exist in the world. It's not possible to be entirely sepa-
rate, evading all contact with outside agencies. Not only is it impos-
sible, it's not a good idea. Cooperation with others is healthy for
Narcotics Anonymous. Contacts between our groups and the pub-
lic help others understand NA better. They help increase public good-
will toward NA. They lead doctors, teachers, police, friends, and
relatives to recommend NA to addicts who want recovery. They help
us carry the message to addicts who can't get to regular meetings.
Letting others know who we are and what we offer increases the
chance that addicts seeking recovery will hear our message.
    NA groups often cultivate good relations with nearby treatment
facilities. They make it known that their meetings are always open
to addicts from these facilities and make them welcome when they
visit. There's a difference, though, between cooperation and endorse-
ment. When a group's primary purpose becomes blurred by its rela-
tionship with some other facility or organization, it's time for the
group to step back and examine that relationship. For instance, when
a group or an area holds a dance, should it offer a reduced entry price
to patients from such facilities? Why not just extend such reductions

124                              It Works


to all newcomers? We should ask these kinds of questions whenever
our group's relationship with a related facility or outside enterprise
becomes so close that our group appears to be linked with the other
organization. By asking ourselves these questions, we help ensure
that our cooperation with an outside agency does not inadvertently
become an endorsement of that agency.
    There are many related facilities and outside enterprises devoted
to understanding addiction and aiding recovery. Like NA, each has
its particular primary purpose that is reflected in its literature and its
message. While that purpose may be similar to ours, it will not be
the same as ours because the organization is separate from us. We
use NA literature and speakers in our meetings to help us fulfill NA's
primary purpose. An NA group that uses another organization's litera-
ture or speakers endorses that organization's primary purpose, not ours.
    Although a few NA groups meet in their own buildings, most do
not. Those who rent meeting space from other organizations need
to take special care never to endorse, finance, or lend the NA name
to the organizations from which they rent their meeting space. For
instance, is the group paying substantially more to meet in a particular
facility than it would somewhere else? Does this make it appear that
the group endorses the facility in which it meets? Is the group bet-
ter able to carry the NA message by meeting at that facility, or is the
group funding an outside enterprise with its "rent" payment? When
we devote our energies and funds to carrying the NA message, we
free ourselves from distractions or confusion with the primary pur-
pose of other organizations.
    It's important to remember that we as NA members and groups
are responsible for observing our Twelve Traditions. The facilities in
which we meet do not have this responsibility; neither do other or-
ganizations. If it appears that some outside organization or facility
is compromising our traditions, we are responsible to discuss their
actions with them. While we cannot demand that they change their

                                 Tradition Six                     125


behavior, a reasonable approach and open discussion will often lead
to mutually satisfactory solutions.
    A group's meetings provide a forum in which individual members
can share their recovery with one another. The message we carry in
our meetings can either enhance our efforts to fulfill our primary pur-
pose or distract us from it. Each of us can play a part in carrying
out Tradition Six by asking ourselves, "What do I do to clarify NA's
relations with other organizations?" Many of us use a variety of re-
sources in our personal programs of recovery and spiritual growth.
Not all of them, however, relate directly to NA's primary purpose. Do
we imply an endorsement of a related facility or outside enterprise
when we share in an NA meeting about the good things we've found
elsewhere? Do we distract other members at the meeting from NA's
message of recovery or give new members the wrong impression
about the Narcotics Anonymous program? No one can answer these
questions for us. But by answering these questions for ourselves,
we can each help free our group of problems that could divert us
from our primary purpose.


Applying spiritual principles
    The application of principles is the basis of our freedom. When
we adhere to the principles of recovery, we are free to carry the mes-
sage and interact with others, knowing that we will not compromise
our purpose. Some of the principles that help us observe Tradition
Six include humility, integrity, faith, harmony, and anonymity.
    Humility reminds us of NA's role in society. We have a program
that has provided much help to many addicts seeking recovery. We
do not, however, have any other purpose in society than to carry the
NA message, nor do we pretend that Narcotics Anonymous offers
anything more than freedom from active addiction. It may be tempt-
ing to think of other good things we might do in the world or for each

126                               It Works


other if we extended our focus or closely allied ourselves with a wide
range of related facilities or outside enterprises. These grandiose
dreams serve only to divert us from our primary purpose. Carrying
our message to the still-suffering addict is sufficient for us.
    Carrying a clear message of recovery in NA reflects integrity. Our
message is outlined in our Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions and
further articulated in NA literature. Because our message is also our
identity, we take care not to confuse it with the beliefs or literature
of other organizations.
    We demonstrate faith when we don't trade our endorsement,
funds, or name for the cooperation of others. It's true that our friends
in society can help us carry our message to addicts who need us.
But our faith lies in the effectiveness of our message and the Higher
Power that guides our recovery, not in the related facilities and out-
side enterprises we deal with. If a relationship with another organi-
zation compromises our devotion to carrying the recovery message,
we need not be afraid to let go of that relationship. Our strength is
in the power of the NA program. After all, it works!
    The principle of harmony is both assumed and supported by Tra-
dition Six. Our groups seek to cooperate with others in society when-
ever possible and as much as possible. Our contacts with others are
made simple and straightforward when we let them know, right from
the start, how far we can go in cooperating with them. By respect-
ing the Sixth Tradition's boundaries in our group's relations with other
organizations, we generate harmony in those relations.
    Our identity as a fellowship is founded in anonymity and selfless
service, carrying the message one addict to another. The relation-
ships we have with outside organizations are not based on the per-
sonalities of our leaders; our groups themselves are responsible for
their cooperation with other organizations, making those contacts
stronger and more effective.

                                 Tradition Six                      127


     Additionally, anonymity helps us avoid blurring our purpose in our
contacts with other organizations. Our relationships with outside
agencies exist to help us fulfill our primary purpose, not merely to
build our reputation or prestige. When we observe the spirit of ano-
nymity, we seek nothing other than to carry the recovery message to
the addict who still suffers.
     Within the limits established by Tradition Six, we have tremendous
freedom to carry the message of recovery and help other addicts. We
have clear boundaries set by our identity as Narcotics Anonymous.
When we take care to observe those boundaries, our outside rela-
tionships enhance our ability to carry the message to the addict who
still suffers rather than diverting us from our primary purpose.

128                              It Works


                   TRADITION SEVEN

              "Every NA group ought to be fully self-supporting,
                     declining outside contributions."

   The Seventh Tradition adds further clarity to our group's public
relations. Tradition Six cautioned us against funding other organiza-
tions, lest problems of money, property, or prestige divert us from our
primary purpose. Tradition Seven encourages us to decline funding
from other organizations for the same reason: to maintain our group's
focus on its primary purpose. By paying our own expenses, we re-
main free to carry our own message.
   We encourage every NA group to be fully self-supporting. We also
recognize that many meetings don't start that way. Some meetings
are started by one or two NA members who want to help carry the
message to other addicts. Frequently, such members pay rent and
buy literature for these meetings out of their own pockets. Some-
times they're given help by established NA groups or by the nearest
area committee. Either way, it may take some time before a new
meeting is able to stand on its own feet.
   Other meetings--for instance, many in institutions--are started
by nonmember professionals who've become acquainted with the
Narcotics Anonymous program. Wanting to provide their clients with
access to what NA has to offer, these professionals set a time, find a
room, buy some literature, give a Group Booklet to the addicts who've
gathered, and help them start a meeting. After some exposure to
the principles underlying the NA program, these recovering addicts
begin taking responsibility for their meetings themselves.
   How a meeting is begun is not nearly so important as how it
grows. Our experience is that, once a meeting is established, it gath-
ers momentum. The meeting begins attracting a group of addicts
who attend on a fairly consistent basis. These addicts share their



                                   128

                              Tradition Seven                      129


experiences with one another and help each other better understand
NA's principles of recovery. At this point, the meeting becomes more
than just an event; an NA group has evolved from the meeting, com-
plete with members. With the evolution of an NA group, its mem-
bers committed to supporting one another, the group as a whole is
ready to take full responsibility for its obligations.
    Many of us think of the Seventh Tradition as the money tradi-
tion. While we have come to associate this tradition of self-support
with the funds we contribute, the spirit of the Seventh Tradition goes
much farther than that. Whatever a group needs to fulfill its primary
purpose should be provided by the group itself.
    The question then is, what does a group need? First and fore-
most, it needs a message to carry--and that, it already has. In the
course of its evolution, the group has attracted members who've
proven to one another that an addict, any addict, can stop using
drugs, lose the desire to use, and find a new way to live. Without
that message, the group has no reason to exist; with it, an NA group
needs little more.
    Beyond that, the needs of the group are simple. Groups need
to rent meeting places where their members can gather and where
newcomers can find them. Most groups find it important to buy NA
literature which they make available at their meetings. The expenses
associated with these things may be substantial, yet most groups can
meet such expenses by passing the hat.
    After paying their basic expenses, most groups contribute to the
NA boards and committees that serve them. Phonelines, meeting
lists, NA literature, H&I panels, and public information presentations
all benefit the group. That's why service contributions are just as
surely a part of a group's self-support obligation as the rent for its
meeting room. Like the groups, NA service boards and committees
decline contributions from sources outside the fellowship. Unlike the
groups, however, our service boards and committees are not themselves

130                                It Works


fully self-supporting. They have been created to help the groups ful-
fill their primary purpose more effectively, and they depend on group
contributions for the money they need to do their work.
     To fulfill its purpose, the group also needs some things that don't
cost a penny. A group needs someone to open its meeting room,
set up the chairs, and prepare the literature table. In some groups,
a member offers to prepare refreshments, helping establish a hospi-
table environment for the newcomer. Most importantly, a group needs
the consistent commitment of its members to show up and take part
in its meetings. Upon that commitment rests the group's stability;
without it, no group can survive long. From the commitment of its
members, the group also draws its ability to carry our recovery mes-
sage. Group service and active group membership are two vital con-
tributions to group self-support, contributions that don't cost any
money at all.
     As simple as a group's needs are, a group's decision to become
fully self-supporting does not usually require the commitment of ex-
tensive amounts of its members' money, time, or other resources. If
a group is having problems sustaining itself, it may want to ask itself
some questions: What is our primary purpose, and how do we fulfill
it? What does our group need to fulfill its primary purpose? Have
we confused our wants with our needs? When a group's sense of its
needs have become unreasonable, the simplicity of the Fifth Tradi-
tion can help deflate those needs to their proper size.
     But what if a group is still unable to pay its own way even after
examining its understanding of the Fifth Tradition? Tradition Seven
tells our groups that they should not seek outside contributions--
but why not? What considerations keep us from seeking money out-
side the NA Fellowship?
     First, the group will want to consider its identity as a part of the
Fellowship of Narcotics Anonymous. Recovery in NA is very different in
a number of ways from our using. When we were using, many of us took

                                Tradition Seven                      131


whatever we could from whomever we could as often as we could.
Our group's decision to become fully self-supporting, declining out-
side contributions, reflects the new way our members are living in
recovery. Rather than taking what we want or need from others, we
are paying our own way.
    The group will also want to examine its identity as a group. When
we were using, most of us looked out for ourselves and ourselves
alone, not giving any thought for one another's welfare. An NA re-
covery group, on the other hand, is founded on its members' com-
mitment to one another. Many of us have tried to find a way of
making it on our own, but without success. We've found we need
one another to survive and to grow. The NA group is both the ex-
pression and the fulfillment of that need we have for one another's
support. An NA group reinforces the solidarity of its members and
the foundation of their continued recovery by declining outside con-
tributions.
    "Alright," we say, "our group has made a commitment to become
fully self-supporting. But what if the money we collect from passing
the hat still isn't sufficient to meet our needs? What if we sold some
T-shirts or jewelry to raise some cash or held a dinner and asked for
a donation at the door? Perhaps the energy our members put into
such activities could be turned into the money we need to pay our bills."
    On the face of it, there doesn't seem to be any contradiction be-
tween the Seventh Tradition and these kinds of money-raising activi-
ties. Before engaging in such activities, however, the group might want
to ask itself some questions. First, of course, is the question of need.
For what purpose does the group seek these funds? We might also
ask ourselves whether such activities, intended to raise money to help
our group carry the message, might end up diverting us from carry-
ing the message. Money-raising activities usually take a good bit of
time to manage, time that might be better spent in fulfilling our pri-
mary purpose more directly. If fundraising activities are successful,

132                               It Works


bringing in more money than the group needs to meet its obligations,
controversy over control of that money may well arise, distracting the
group from its primary purpose. A group may also want to consider
whether the atmosphere created by selling goods and services at its
meetings might detract from the free, open atmosphere so condu-
cive to recovery.
    By and large, our groups have found that the simplest, straightest
path to full self-support is through the voluntary contributions of their
own members. For this reason, we discourage groups from engag-
ing in fundraising activities. If a group is unable to provide for its
own needs from the contributions of its members, perhaps group
members will want to consider increasing their contributions.
    In the same breath as we speak of this, however, we need also
recall our fellowship's Third Tradition, which affirms that the only re-
quirement for membership is a desire to stop using. Our member-
ship, whether we are speaking of membership in NA as a whole or
group membership, does not depend on the amount of money we
give; indeed, we aren't required to give any money at all in order to
consider ourselves NA members.
    If our group has carefully examined its expenses, trimmed them
to match only what it needs to fulfill its primary purpose, and still
doesn't bring in enough money to pay its own way, the group's mem-
bers will be left with some questions only they can answer for them-
selves, individually: What do I get from the group? Does my personal
recovery depend on its survival? Am I able to give more than I've
already given and still meet my own financial responsibilities?
    At the same time as we consider our levels of personal contribu-
tions to the group, we should remember that Tradition Seven speaks
of the group as being self-supporting, not of one or two well-off group
members paying all the group's expenses or doing all its work. Later,
in the chapters on Traditions Nine and Twelve, we will look at rotating
leadership as a way to keep a group, service board, or committee from

                                Tradition Seven                     133


becoming a mere extension of one or two members' personalities.
In the same way, the Seventh Tradition encourages the NA group as
a whole to support itself, avoiding financial dependence on one mem-
ber or another. We each do well in giving our part toward the group's
self-support obligations without making the group overly dependent
on our individual contributions.
     In the end, our individual decisions and group commitments are
entirely up to us because we are the ones who have to live with them.
However, certain lines from our White Booklet, written in reference
to the Twelve Steps, seem to apply equally to the observance of the
Seventh Tradition--indeed, to all the traditions: "If you want what
we have to offer, and are willing to make the effort to get it... these
are the principles that made our recovery possible." If we want what
the group has to offer us individually, and if our group wants to reap
the benefits associated with self-support, we will practice the prin-
ciples that make those things possible.


Applying spiritual principles
     Our Twelve Traditions describe those specific things that have
been found to help our groups remain strong, lively, and free. Un-
derlying the specifics of our traditions, however, are dozens of spiri-
tual principles, any one of which could be applied to almost any of
the Twelve Traditions. This broad field of principle is the ground upon
which the traditions have grown. The more we cultivate this ground,
the stronger our understanding and application of each of the tradi-
tions themselves will be. Some of the principles which will strengthen
our appreciation of the Seventh Tradition are gratitude, responsibil-
ity, faith, integrity, anonymity, and freedom.
     The gratitude we speak of in regard to Tradition Seven is like the
collective sense of direction the Second Tradition talks about; it is
the gratitude of the NA group as a group. When NA members gather

134                              It Works


to share their recovery, they generate a sense of gratitude among them-
selves. They are grateful the group exists and want it to continue to
be there for them and for the members yet to come. The gratitude of
the group speaks, in part, through the group's collective commitment
to support itself.
    The group's decision to become fully self-supporting, declining
outside contributions, reflects the group's sense of responsibility for
itself. In recovery, we discard the illusion that the rest of the world is
responsible to take care of us; rather, we take due pride in caring for
ourselves. Individually, we demonstrate our newfound maturity by
accepting the weight of our own burdens; collectively, we demonstrate
our maturity by accepting responsibility for our group, neither seek-
ing nor accepting outside contributions.
    The burden of responsibility, however, may seem unbearable with-
out an appreciation for the simplicity of the group's needs. The com-
mitment to become self-supporting is not a commitment to raise vast
sums of money to fulfill sweeping programs. Rather, the group de-
termines it will muster the few basic resources it needs to fulfill its
simple primary purpose: to carry the message to the still-suffering
addict. The ideal of simplicity, when applied to Tradition Seven, helps
our groups avoid the heated conflicts that often arise over the con-
trol of great resources. Problems of money, property, and prestige
need not divert our groups from their primary purpose when the sim-
plicity of that purpose and of our needs is kept squarely in focus.
    In understanding the principles underlying the Seventh Tradition,
practical simplicity walks hand in hand with our faith in a Higher Power.
So long as we take our direction from that Power, our needs are met.
Likewise, the decision to decline outside contributions, meeting the
group's needs from the group's own resources, is based firmly in faith.
So long as our group remains devoted to fulfilling its primary purpose,
its needs are met.

                               Tradition Seven                          135


     As members of an NA group, we have made a commitment to sup-
port one another in our recovery. Our group's commitment to be-
come fully self-supporting reflects the group's integrity, its faithfulness
to its fundamental identity. We support each other in recovery and,
together, we fulfill our collective responsibilities as members of a self-
supporting group.
     The anonymity we exercise in accepting our group responsibili-
ties reflects our integrity. The anonymity of the Seventh Tradition
means more than just contributing anonymously, without thought of
recognition, though of course it does involve that. Anonymity in the
context of Tradition Seven also means that all the contributions of a
group's members are important. Money put in the basket, time put
into setting up the meeting room, energy put into making newcom-
ers welcome--all are part of the responsibility of the group, and all
are equally important contributions to the self-supporting NA group.
     Our anonymity, our integrity, our faith, our sense of simplicity, our
acceptance of responsibility, our gratitude--together, all these things
spell freedom. By encouraging our group to pay its own way, the Sev-
enth Tradition gives our group the freedom to share its recovery as
it sees fit, not obligated to outside contributors. Further, it gives our
group the freedom that comes from inner strength, the strength that
develops through applying spiritual principles. By making the deci-
sion to become fully self-supporting, our NA group assures that it
will always have the resources it needs to survive and continue ful-
filling its primary purpose.

136                                   It Works


                     TRADITION EIGHT

         "NarcoticsAnonymousshouldremainforevernonprofessional,
              but our service centers may employ special workers."

     Narcotics Anonymous offers a distinctly nonprofessional approach
to the disease of addiction. We have no hospitals, no treatment cen-
ters, no outpatient clinics, none of the facilities associated with a pro-
fessional enterprise. We do not diagnose anyone's condition or track
the progress of our patients--in fact, we have no patients, only mem-
bers. Our groups do not provide professional therapeutic, medical,
legal, or psychiatric services. We are simply a fellowship of recover-
ing addicts who meet regularly to help each other stay clean.
     In discussing the Sixth Tradition, we considered the sufficiency
of our message. Narcotics Anonymous groups need not rely on out-
side enterprises in order to effectively offer recovery from addiction.
In the same way, Tradition Eight reminds us that our members need
no professional credentials to be effective in carrying the NA mes-
sage. The heart of the NA way of recovery from addiction is one ad-
dict helping another. We have no certified NA counselors; our varied
experiences in recovery from drug addiction are all the credentials
we need. The first-hand exposure each of us has in recovery from
addiction is more than sufficient to qualify us to carry the message
to other addicts. Our members are not paid a salary for their Twelfth
Step work, nor do our groups charge any dues or fees for carrying
the NA message. This is what we mean when we say that Narcotics
Anonymous should remain forever nonprofessional.
     This is not to say that a member of Narcotics Anonymous should
never take a job as a professional therapist of one sort or another.
It is only to say that, at an NA meeting, a member's vocation is irrel-
evant. The therapeutic value in the message we share with one an-
other lies in our personal experience in recovery, not in our credentials,
our training, or our professional status.

                                        136

                               Tradition Eight                       137


    We don't sell recovery; we share it freely with others in a spirit of
love and gratitude. However, Narcotics Anonymous groups, service
boards, and committees may require professional help in fulfilling their
responsibilities. Tradition Eight makes a distinction between "selling
our recovery" and paying people to help us do our service work. If
one of our committees requires professional assistance in a service
task, it's alright, for example, to contract the help of a lawyer or an
accountant. If we need to employ someone to help us on a regular
basis, a "special worker," we may give them a paycheck in return for
the services they provide us. Special workers who are also NA mem-
bers are not selling their recovery. They are simply providing profes-
sional service support we would otherwise have to hire nonaddicts
to provide.


Applying spiritual principles
    Tradition Eight is one of the simplest, most straightforward of the
Twelve Traditions. Likewise, the principles underlying the Eighth Tra-
dition are eminently practical ones: humility, prudence, anonymity, and
integrity.
    An NA group exercises humility when it does not pretend to be
anything more or less than it is. We do not claim to be professionals
or experts in anything. We are not physicians, psychiatrists, or thera-
pists; we are recovering addicts. All we offer is our collective practi-
cal experience in getting clean and learning to live clean. The value
of our program comes from the identification and trust that exist be-
tween one addict and another.
    We further exercise humility when we recognize that sometimes
we need professionals to help us fulfill our services. We place great
emphasis on the therapeutic value of one addict helping another,
sometimes to the extent that we are reluctant to hire professional
assistance when we need it. But some NA services require too much

138                               It Works


time or expertise for our members to fulfill on a strictly volunteer ba-
sis. We mustn't allow our pride to prevent our fellowship from hiring
the help it needs to support its services.
    Neither should we hire special workers for jobs we can do our-
selves. We must exercise prudence in employing professional assis-
tance for our services. Most NA service responsibilities do not require
special expertise or large, consistent commitments of time. Our mem-
bers are perfectly capable of fulfilling such responsibilities on a vol-
unteer basis. By exercising prudence, we can distinguish between
those tasks requiring the support of special workers and those we
can fulfill voluntarily.
    The Eighth Tradition reminds our groups of the value of anonym-
ity. Professionals are people with certain specialized skills, often rec-
ognized by the credentials given them by a certifying panel. An NA
group has no such recognized experts. All group members are ex-
perts in their own recovery, fully qualified to share that recovery with
another addict.
    Finally, Tradition Eight supports the integrity of the NA group by
helping it preserve what is most important about its fundamental
identity. What is Narcotics Anonymous, after all, but a fellowship of
addicts freely sharing with one another the simple message of their
own experience? The Eighth Tradition is a firm, permanent commit-
ment on the part of each NA group to steadfastly maintain the fea-
ture of our program that is, indeed, of foremost value. By agreeing
that Narcotics Anonymous should remain forever nonprofessional,
we reaffirm our belief that the therapeutic value of one addict help-
ing another is without parallel! This is the heart of our program; so
long as that heart beats strongly, our fellowship and our recovery shall
remain vital.

                                   Tradition Nine                          139


                       TRADITION NINE

  "NA, as such, ought never be organized, but we may create service boards or
               committees directly responsible to those they serve."

    In our White Booklet, we read that "NA is a nonprofit fellowship
or society of men and women for whom drugs had become a major
problem. We are recovering addicts who meet regularly to help each
other stay clean." This is NA, as such--a simple fellowship using a
nonprofessional, addict-to-addict approach to the disease of addic-
tion. We are a fellowship, not a lobbying organization or a medical
service or a chain of treatment facilities. We are nonprofessional. We
have no rules, no fees, no governing bodies, and only one member-
ship requirement: a desire to stop using. Our primary purpose is,
quite simply, to carry the message. These are some of the traditional
standards by which our groups may guide themselves, and our ulti-
mate guiding authority is a Higher Power as it finds expression in the
conscience of our members. That's NA, as such, as we understand
it. Our groups work as well as they do because they keep it simple,
lest anything get in the way of carrying our message as simply and
directly as possible, one addict to another.
    Yet for all its emphasis on keeping things simple, Tradition Nine
is not an excuse for dis-organized service work; instead, it recognizes
that our fellowship does require a certain degree of organization to
fulfill its primary purpose. Rather than recommend that NA groups
themselves become organized, the Ninth Tradition suggests that
groups organize separate boards and committees to serve their needs.
Just as we are nonprofessional but may hire professionals to help us,
so we are not organized but may organize boards or committees to
serve us. This arrangement ensures that NA, as such, maintains its
uncluttered, direct approach to recovery while assuring our ability to
fulfill service tasks requiring a certain amount of organization.



                                        139

140                                It Works


    Okay, so we may create service boards or committees. Now we
must ask ourselves, why would we want to create such things? What
are the needs these boards and committees would fulfill? To answer
this question, let's look at how an NA group evolves, as we did when
considering the Seventh Tradition.
    In the beginning, an area's first NA group only needs to gather
its members together so they can help one another stay clean and
carry their message to other addicts. As the group grows, it begins
taking care of a variety of business related to its meetings, trying to
ensure that the message is carried as effectively as possible. To main-
tain the focus of its recovery meetings, the group usually conducts its
business meeting separately, keeping NA, as such, as simple as possible.
    As the group grows even larger, it often sprouts new groups. To
maintain some of the unity and camaraderie that existed when there
was only one group in the area, these groups elect representatives
who meet periodically. These representatives share information with
one another about how their individual groups are doing and help
one another find solutions to problems one group or another may
be having. From time to time, they may even organize a joint recovery
meeting or social activity, gathering the entire NA community together.
    Sooner or later, the groups realize the potential they have in this
committee of representatives. Through this committee, the groups
can combine their guidance and resources so that each of them can
function more effectively and all, together, can carry the message far-
ther. The groups may ask their committee to buy bulk supplies of
literature, making it easier for each group to procure NA books and
pamphlets. The groups might ask their committee to compile a di-
rectory for distribution at meetings throughout the area, making it
easier for addicts to find out where NA meetings are being held. The
groups may ask that public information, hospitals and institutions,
and phoneline programs be set up, letting still-suffering addicts who
might not hear of NA by word of mouth know of the fellowship's

                                Tradition Nine                       141


existence and increasing general awareness of Narcotics Anonymous.
The point is, the development of these services is based squarely on
the groups' needs. We create these boards and committees to serve
us in fulfilling those needs.
    First, the groups define their needs; then, they create the boards
and committees which will serve them. Once created, how do we
assure that our service boards and committees will remain directly
responsible to those they serve? We do this, first and foremost,
through consistent communication. Through their representatives,
groups communicate with the boards and committees serving them.
The groups provide regular information about their condition and their
activities. They communicate their concerns, their needs, their ideas,
and their wishes. This information helps our boards and commit-
tees better understand and serve the needs of the groups.
    Communication is a two-way street. Groups share information
and guidance with the boards and committees serving them. Then
these boards and committees report back to the groups to which they
are responsible, describing their operations, discussions, and plans.
Responsible service boards and committees consult the groups in
matters directly affecting them and seek direction from the groups
in matters not already covered by existing policy. By maintaining regu-
lar two-way communication between NA groups and the boards and
committees serving them, we create an atmosphere of responsibility
that serves our fellowship and its primary purpose well.


Applying spiritual principles
    Because the Ninth Tradition empowers the groups to establish a
service structure--not a simple thing--many of us think of Tradition
Nine as being very complex. In reality, the spiritual principles under-
lying this tradition are very simple. The Ninth Tradition focuses, first,
not on the relationship between groups and service committees but

142                                It Works


on NA, as such. We are a fellowship of recovering addicts who help
one another stay clean, nothing more.
    Whenever possible, organized service work should be kept dis-
tinct from the groups so that they can remain free to simply and di-
rectly fulfill our primary purpose, addict to addict. The boards and
committees we do organize, we organize on the basis of need only,
using the simplest guidelines possible. We organize them solely
to serve us, not to establish a complex governing bureaucracy. The
Ninth Tradition is far from complicated; in fact, it speaks through-
out of simplicity.
    In the same way, Tradition Nine speaks of anonymity. When the
Ninth Tradition exhorts NA, as such, never to become organized, it
is telling us that we ought not create a governing hierarchy, a top-
down bureaucracy dictating to our groups and members. As we noted
in the Second Tradition, our leaders are not governors but servants
taking their directions from the collective conscience of those they
serve. Our primary purpose, not the personalities of our trusted ser-
vants, is what defines NA, as such. To reinforce the anonymity of
Tradition Nine, our groups, service boards, and committees practice
various systems of rotating leadership so that no one personality ever
dominates.
    Another principle implicit in the Ninth Tradition is the principle
of humility. Each group on its own is somewhat limited in its ability
to fulfill its primary purpose; it has only so many members, so much
time, and so many dollars to use in carrying the message by itself.
However, when a number of groups combine their resources by join-
ing together to form a service board or committee, they enhance their
ability to fulfill their primary purpose. Together, they become able to
do what they could not do alone.
    The principle of humility also applies to the boards and commit-
tees spoken of in our Ninth Tradition. These boards and commit-
tees are established to serve only, not to govern. They are directly

                              Tradition Nine                        143


responsible to the groups and are always subject to the explicit di-
rection of the groups. Although our service boards and committees
may do much to help our groups fulfill their primary purpose, it is in
the groups where NA, as such, comes to focus, not in the boards
and committees that serve them.
    Prudence is one of the guiding principles behind the Ninth Tradi-
tion relationship between the groups and the boards or committees
that serve them. Groups are responsible to consider their needs care-
fully, planning prudently before they create boards and committees.
There is nothing that will complicate the simplicity of NA, as such,
more than a needlessly elaborate array of committees, boards, and
subcommittees.
    The groups' responsibility does not end with the establishment
of a board or committee to fulfill their service needs; in fact, that is
only the beginning. As long as the committee remains active, the
groups should maintain familiarity with its affairs. The groups should
also provide continuing guidance to the committee. Our boards and
committees cannot be held accountable to the groups they serve un-
less the groups play a responsible role in their service relationships.
    Finally, the Ninth Tradition speaks of fidelity. Narcotics Anony-
mous groups join together, combining their resources to create ser-
vice boards and committees that will help them better fulfill their
primary purpose. Those boards and committees are not called to
govern Narcotics Anonymous; they are called, rather, to faithfully ex-
ecute the trust given them by the groups they serve. With a mini-
mum of organization, our service boards and committees perform
tasks on behalf of the groups, helping our groups remain free to do
what they do best, simply and directly. Our fidelity to the Ninth Tra-
dition assures that the simple, spontaneous atmosphere of recovery
shared one addict to another in the NA group is never organized, leg-
islated, or regulated out of existence.

144                              It Works


                      TRADITION TEN

           "Narcotics Anonymous has no opinion on outside issues;
      hence, the NA name ought never be drawn into public controversy."

    Narcotics Anonymous is a society of recovering addicts who help
one another stay clean by applying certain simple spiritual principles.
Our primary purpose, as groups and as a fellowship, is to offer that
same help to any addict seeking recovery. Aside from that, NA has
no opinions whatsoever. By refusing to take sides on other issues,
we avoid becoming embroiled in public controversies that could dis-
tract us from our primary purpose. This is the message of our Tenth
Tradition.
    To most of us, it probably seems obvious that Narcotics Anony-
mous, as a fellowship, has no opinion on the pressing world issues
of our day. Most of these issues have little to do with either addic-
tion or recovery. But there are a great number of addiction-related
issues that others might expect a worldwide society of recovering drug
addicts to take positions on. "What is NA's opinion," we are some-
times asked, "on the addiction treatment industry, other twelve-step
fellowships, the legalization of drugs, addiction-related illnesses, and
all the rest?" Our answer, according to Tradition Ten, is that our
groups and our fellowship take no position, pro or con, on any is-
sues except the NA program itself. We maintain neutrality on such
issues so that we can maintain our focus on what we do best: shar-
ing recovery from one addict to another.
    However, even in explaining our own program in public, we may
find ourselves treading on controversial ground. NA's views on total
abstinence, on the possibility of recovering in society without long-
term institutionalization, on the disease concept of addiction, even
our broad views on spirituality are not met with universal acceptance.
Others who deal with addiction and recovery may view these



                                   144

                                Tradition Ten                          145


matters very differently than we do. We cannot deny those aspects
of our program that others take exception to. We can, however, take
care to explain our program in such a way as not to invite contro-
versy deliberately. "We do not suggest that everyone adopt our views,
nor do we oppose those with different views," we can explain. "We
simply want you to know what the Narcotics Anonymous program is
like." So long as we focus, as groups and as a fellowship, on our
recovery experience rather than our opinions of why or how NA works,
we will stay as far as possible from public controversy.
    Tradition Ten restricts NA, as a fellowship, from stating opinions
on outside issues. However, it places no such restriction on the in-
dividual member. In Narcotics Anonymous, we believe strongly in
personal freedom. Addicts who have a desire to stop using can be-
come members of NA simply by saying so. We have no dues or fees,
no pledges to sign, no promises to make to anyone, ever. Though a
spiritual program, we encourage our members to develop their own
understanding of a Higher Power. Even our leaders are only trusted
servants, with no power to tell individual members what to do, think,
or say. NA members are encouraged to think for themselves, to de-
velop their own opinions, and to express those opinions as they see fit.
    The only caution Tradition Ten offers individual NA members is
that, when speaking publicly, we think through what we're going to
say before we say it. In certain situations, anything an NA member
says will be taken as NA's opinion, even when the situation itself has
nothing to do with Narcotics Anonymous and the member clearly
states that the views expressed are strictly personal. It's not our fault
if others misinterpret what we say as individuals; this does not, how-
ever, make the complications arising from such misinterpretations any
less serious for NA. We may be able to avoid such complications be-
fore they arise simply by thinking carefully before we speak in public.
    But what about speaking in a recovery gathering? Does the Tenth
Tradition tell us that, as individual recovering addicts, we must not

146                                It Works


talk in NA meetings about the challenges we face? No, it does not.
While a particular problem may be an outside issue, its effect on our
recovery is not; everything affecting a recovering addict's life is ma-
terial for sharing. If a problem we are having impacts our ability to
stay clean and grow spiritually, it's not an outside issue. Many things
can put us off balance and challenge our recovery. We often discuss
such challenges with one another at our meetings, seeking to ease
our personal burdens by sharing them with our fellow NA members.
We ask others to share how they have applied the principles of the
program in similar circumstances, recovering their balance and
strengthening their recovery. We need no one's permission to talk
about such things in our meetings.
    But, for all that, we all know that controversial personal opinions
can distract our meetings from their primary purpose. If everything
is recovery material, yet we want to help our meetings retain their
focus on recovery, how do we decide what to share? We can ask our-
selves some questions: Am I sharing from my experience, or am I
expounding an opinion? As an individual, am I dwelling in the prob-
lem or seeking the solution? Do I share to draw the group together
or to force the group into separate camps? Do I make it clear that
what I say, I say for myself, not for Narcotics Anonymous? So long as
we keep our common welfare and our primary purpose in focus, we will
avoid the kind of controversy that distracts us from recovery.


Applying spiritual principles
    Foremost among the principles our groups and our fellowship ap-
ply in practicing Tradition Ten is the principle of unity. For all the
diversity of individual opinion among our members, Narcotics Anony-
mous itself is united in having no opinion on any issues apart from
its own program. As a fellowship, we agree to take positions only on
those ideas that have drawn us together, our principles of recovery,
not on the many personal opinions that might divide us.

                                Tradition Ten                         147


     The Tenth Tradition is an exercise in responsibility. As groups and
as a fellowship, we are responsible to carry our message to the still-
suffering addict. We are responsible to provide an atmosphere in
which recovering addicts can share freely with one another. To do
these things effectively, we must stay as free of the distractions of
public controversy as possible. We may not be able to avoid all public
controversy, because various features of the Narcotics Anonymous
program itself--such as our views on total abstinence--may arouse
a certain amount of contention in some public quarters. However,
we absolutely can avoid any controversies which might arise from
groups or the fellowship taking positions on issues entirely outside
the scope of our program.
     Individual NA members responsibly exercise the Tenth Tradition
by personally guarding NA's neutrality whenever and wherever they
speak. Publicly, we differentiate between our personal opinions and
those of NA, avoiding the expression of any personal opinions at all
in circumstances where the difference might not be recognized. In
meetings, NA members make it clear that what we share is our own
experience, not the position of Narcotics Anonymous, providing as
little opportunity as possible for misinterpretation. The way we speak
as NA members often affects how others view NA; therefore, as re-
sponsible members, we speak carefully, guarding the neutrality that
is so important to the welfare of us all.
     To fulfill Tradition Ten, our groups, service boards, and commit-
tees must exercise prudence in their public contacts. Elements of
our fellowship are constantly in touch with others in society. Groups
maintain contacts with their meeting facilities and those in their neigh-
borhoods; H&I subcommittees, with facility administrators; public in-
formation workers, with health professionals, charitable organizations,
government agencies, and the media. In all our contacts with soci-
ety, we must take care not to express any opinions on issues outside
the scope of our program. Such prudence will protect our credibility

148                               It Works


in the public eye on the only issue that truly concerns Narcotics
Anonymous: our program of recovery from addiction.
    By practicing the Tenth Tradition, we demonstrate our belief in
the value of anonymity. All of us have our opinions. But when we
speak as groups and as a fellowship, we do not take positions on
the opinions of individuals. What we have to share with the public is
our fellowship's message, not our personal opinions.
    Tradition Ten is supremely practical. The only issue upon which
our fellowship is willing to publicly stake its reputation is the NA pro-
gram itself. Underlying the practicality of the Tenth Tradition, how-
ever, can be found a fundamental spiritual principle, that of humility.
Narcotics Anonymous does not claim to have the answer to every
trouble in the world. We do not even claim that we necessarily have
the only answer to addiction. When we share in public, as groups or
as a fellowship, we share only our message. We talk about what we
do, neither supporting nor opposing what anyone else does. We are
what we are, and that's all that we are: a society of recovering drug
addicts sharing their recovery with one another and offering the same
to the addict who still suffers. We speak simply about our program,
knowing that our effectiveness will attract more goodwill than any
amount of promotion. Our program has worked for us and is avail-
able for others interested in recovery. If we can be of service, we stand
ready to help.

                                  Tradition Eleven                          149


                   TRADITION ELEVEN

   "Our public relations policy is based on attraction rather than promotion;
                we need always maintain personal anonymity
                     at the level of press, radio, and films."

     The Eleventh Tradition is the cornerstone of NA's public relations
policy. But Tradition Eleven is only one of six traditions that address
various aspects of our relations with the public. The Third and Fifth
Traditions talk about the primary purpose and ultimate target of our
public relations efforts. Traditions Six and Seven describe the na-
ture of our relations with other organizations, and the Tenth Tradi-
tion details our policy concerning public pronouncements on issues
outside the scope of our recovery program. Clearly, our traditions
are just as concerned with our public relations as they are with our
internal relations.
     Most NA groups have some sort of contact with the public in their
everyday affairs. But the public relations spoken of in the Eleventh
Tradition are more deliberate than our group's routine encounters with
those outside the fellowship. The existence of a public relations
"policy" implies the importance of a public relations "program" in car-
rying out our fellowship's primary purpose. Public information work,
done properly, is not promotion; rather, it seeks to make NA attrac-
tive to those who might need us. As NA groups, service boards, and
committees, we deliberately and energetically cultivate good public
relations, not as an incidental result of our normal activity but as a
way to better carry our message to addicts. Narcotics Anonymous
is not a secret society; Tradition Eleven speaks to personal anonym-
ity, not fellowship anonymity. The better known we are by the pub-
lic, the more likely it is that addicts seeking recovery--or their friends,
relatives, or co-workers--will think of us and know where to find us
when they decide to seek help. One way to take part in NA's public



                                        149

150                             It Works


relations program is to become involved in the local public informa-
tion subcommittee.
    The Eleventh Tradition tells us that, when we engage in public re-
lations activity, we are to speak simply and directly of what Narcot-
ics Anonymous is and what we do. We are not to make exaggerated
claims about NA. Our public relations efforts should be as inviting
and nonpromotional as our program itself, saying to addicts and so-
ciety at large, "If you want what we have to offer, this is what we are
and how we work. If we can be of service, please let us know."
    Some organizations use celebrity members as public spokesper-
sons, hoping to enhance the organization's credibility by tying it to
the celebrity's status. This may be fine for other organizations. But
Tradition Eleven tells us in no uncertain terms that, in NA's public
relations efforts, we must never do this--not with celebrity members,
not with any member. If our fellowship used a celebrity member in a
public announcement about NA and the celebrity later relapsed or
otherwise suffered a loss of prestige, what good would that do our
fellowship's credibility? The same could apply to any individual mem-
ber put in the public spotlight on NA's behalf. The credibility of NA's
message can be greatly affected by NA's messengers. In the public
eye--including press, radio, films, and all other media--we need al-
ways maintain personal anonymity.
    The same applies to other kinds of public information work. Pub-
lic anonymity helps keep the focus of our public relations on the NA
message, not the PI workers involved. We never do PI work alone
because a team--even a pair--better displays NA as a fellowship to
the public, while individuals tend to draw attention to themselves.
Teams also tend to keep the personalities of their members in check,
the better to ensure that NA and not the individual addict is what
we present to the public. The truism that "an addict alone is bad
company" applies to our public relations efforts just as well as to our
personal recovery.

                                 Tradition Eleven                       151


    In most circumstances, though, personal anonymity is a purely
personal decision. However closely we may have guarded the secret
of our addiction, most of those close to us probably knew we were
in trouble when we were using. Today it may be helpful to tell them
about our recovery and our membership in Narcotics Anonymous.
    Other circumstances may also warrant the disclosure of our NA
membership. When a friend tells us about the struggles another per-
son is having with addiction, we may want to let that friend know
about Narcotics Anonymous and what it has done for us. When a
co-worker has a drug problem, we may want to share our experience
with that person. None of us will want to indiscriminately trumpet
all the gory details of our addiction to everyone in town, nor will we
disclose our NA membership to everyone we meet. When we think
we may be helpful to someone, however, it may be appropriate to
share a bit of our story and the recovery we've found in Narcotics
Anonymous.
    All our members play a part in our public relations, whether or
not they're involved in public information work. When individual ad-
dicts demonstrate recovery at work in their lives, they become our
strongest attraction, a living testament of NA's effectiveness. Seeing
us now, those who know what we once were like will spread the word
to those they meet that NA works. The further that message is car-
ried, the more likely it is that addicts seeking recovery will be attracted
to the warm, loving support of our fellowship.
    By the same token, we must remember that, wherever we go, we
always represent NA to some degree. If we are seen acting poorly
while we prominently display an NA logo on our T-shirt, we carry a
distinctly unattractive message about our fellowship to the public.
What we say and what we do reflects on our NA recovery and the
NA Fellowship. As responsible NA members, we want that reflection
to be a source of attraction rather than a source of embarrassment.

152                               It Works



Applying spiritual principles
    Tradition Eleven is an expression of our faith in the effectiveness
of our program. As a fellowship, our primary purpose is to carry the
recovery message to the still-suffering addict. To fulfill that primary
purpose, we do not need a promotional public relations policy. To
gain public goodwill and attract addicts to our meetings, all we need
to do is clearly and simply describe the Narcotics Anonymous pro-
gram. We need neither fanfare, overblown claims, nor celebrity en-
dorsements to build our public relations. We have faith that the
effectiveness of our fellowship, once made known, will speak for itself.
    The principle of service, critical to the application of our Eleventh
Tradition, is not a passive principle. To be of maximum service to
the still-suffering addict, we must energetically seek to carry our mes-
sage throughout our cities, towns, and villages. Our public relations
policy is based on attraction, to be sure, not promotion. But to at-
tract the still-suffering addict to our program, we must take vigorous
steps to make our program widely known. The better and broader
our public relations, the better we will be able to serve.
    Earlier in this chapter, we spoke of the more practical aspects of
public anonymity. But, as we will see in the next chapter, anonymity
is far more than just a practical consideration to be taken into ac-
count in carrying out our public relations program. Each of us has
our own life, our own words, and our own story, all adding dimen-
sion and color to the message of our fellowship. But the message
we carry to society is not the message of how great we are as indi-
viduals. The primary purpose of our public relations efforts is to tell
the story of Narcotics Anonymous and what our program offers to
the still-suffering addict. Our practice of public anonymity is built
on the spiritual foundation of all our traditions, ever reminding us to
place principles before personalities.

                                Tradition Twelve                         153


                   TRADITION TWELVE

         "Anonymity is the spiritual foundation of all our traditions,
          ever reminding us to place principles before personalities."

    In personal recovery, we seek to replace self-will with the guid-
ance of a Higher Power in our personal affairs. In the same way, the
traditions describe a fellowship that takes its collective guidance from
spiritual principles rather than individual personalities. That kind of
selflessness is what the Twelfth Tradition means by the word "ano-
nymity," and it is the spiritual foundation upon which Narcotics Anony-
mous is built. Tradition Twelve is all the traditions rolled up in one,
summarizing and reinforcing the message of the previous eleven.
    Anonymity is essential in preserving the stability of our fellowship,
making personal recovery possible. Recovery is a delicate thing. It
grows best in a stable, supportive environment. Each of us and each
of our groups plays a part in maintaining that stability. Our unity is
so precious that, given a choice between fulfilling our own wishes and
preserving our fellowship's common welfare, we put the best inter-
ests of NA first. We do this not only out of enlightened self-interest
but out of our sense of responsibility to our fellow addicts. The prin-
ciple of NA unity comes before the fulfillment of our personal wishes.
    Anonymity is the primary principle underlying our tradition of
membership. While we all have our personal differences, NA's only
membership requirement is what we have in common: a desire to stop
using. This simple principle draws the diverse personalities of those
who suffer from our disease together in a common fellowship of re-
covery.
    The principle of anonymity lies at the core of our fellowship's un-
derstanding of group conscience. The ideas of each individual group
member have their importance, but the group takes its guidance from
the collective conscience of all its members. Before the group makes



                                      153

154                              It Works


a decision, its members consult their Higher Power, seeking spiritual
guidance on the matter at hand. Their individual voices humbly join
in developing a collective sense of God's will for the group, and a
strong common voice arises out of that mix to guide us all. We call
this group conscience. The same principle applies to NA's concept
of leadership. Though individual members serve as NA leaders, these
leaders act only as our servants, carrying out their duties in accor-
dance with the group conscience. The principles of selfless service
and collective guidance come before the personalities of our trusted
servants.
    Just as the principle of anonymity guides the evolution of a group's
collective conscience, so it also applies to group autonomy. Each
NA group is, of course, entirely free to fulfill its primary purpose as it
sees fit, developing its own way of doing things and its own group
personality. Our fellowship places only one restriction on this near-
total liberty: The group may not exercise its personality at the ex-
pense of neighboring groups or NA as a whole. The welfare of each
NA group depends, to an extent, on the welfare of all NA groups.
Our groups do not seek ascendancy over one another; rather, they
join and cooperate to work for the greater good of the fellowship as
a whole. The principle of anonymity draws our autonomous groups
together for the common welfare of them all.
    The principle of anonymity shapes our primary purpose. Although
individual ambition and personal purpose may provide motivation for
our development as human beings, our fellowship is guided by its
collective purpose: to carry our message to the still-suffering addict.
When we enter Narcotics Anonymous, we leave our personal agenda
at the door. We seek to help others rather than only ourselves. This
selfless principle, not personal ambition, defines the primary purpose
of our groups.
    Anonymity guides our fellowship's interactions in society. We are
not a secret organization; we are happy to see our name becoming

                              Tradition Twelve                       155


better known throughout the world with each passing year. However,
we do not trade that name for the endorsement of organizations that
might possibly help us further our primary purpose. Nor do we at-
tempt to gain public influence by asserting the prestige of our
fellowship's name. If we are fulfilling our primary purpose, society
will see our usefulness. We will have no need to trade our endorse-
ment for the support of others. The good spoken of us by our
fellowship's friends will be sufficient recommendation.
    Anonymity is one of the guiding principles behind the way our
groups practice the Seventh Tradition. We believe in the value of self-
less generosity for its own sake. For this reason, we choose to re-
ceive support from our members anonymously. We also encourage
each group as a whole to become fully self-supporting, not depen-
dent on only one or two individual members. The principle of self-
less giving, without expectation of personal distinction or reward, goes
hand-in-hand with the principle of collective responsibility. Together,
they assure both the spiritual solidarity and the financial stability of
our groups.
    This same principle of selfless anonymity is the spiritual founda-
tion of our Eighth Tradition. In Narcotics Anonymous, we have no
professional Twelfth Steppers. Rather, we use the simple language
of empathy to freely share with one another the spiritual experience
we call recovery. A spiritual experience cannot be bought or sold; it
can only be given away. The more we freely share that experience,
the more we strengthen the empathy that joins us together. This tra-
dition reminds us to place the principle of anonymous, selfless giv-
ing before whatever personal desires we may have for recognition or
reward.
    In Narcotics Anonymous, we apply the principle of anonymity in
the way we structure our service organization. Our fellowship has no
authoritarian hierarchy. We create boards and committees solely to serve
us, not to govern. The various elements of our service structure are

156                               It Works


guided by the primary purpose and collective conscience of our fel-
lowship and are held directly accountable for the service they do on
our behalf. Those who serve on our various boards and committees
are expected to do so not to seek power, property, or prestige for
themselves, but to selflessly serve the fellowship that has made their
recovery possible.
    Almost all our groups, service boards, and committees rotate dif-
ferent members through their service positions, rarely asking one in-
dividual to serve in a particular position of responsibility more than
one or two terms in a row. The practice of rotation emphasizes our
fellowship's belief in the value of anonymity in service. NA service is
not primarily a personal endeavor; rather, it is the collective respon-
sibility of our fellowship as a whole. This doesn't mean that we do
not appreciate the care, experience, and insight that individuals may
offer in carrying out their service duties. However, we place the prin-
ciple of anonymity in service before the personalities of our individual
trusted servants. Collective responsibility, not personal authority, is
the guiding force behind NA services.
    The principle of anonymity gives form to our fellowship's public
voice. Each of our many members has personal opinions on a wide
range of subjects. The public message our fellowship carries, how-
ever, is the message of our collective experience in recovery from ad-
diction. As groups and as a fellowship, we have no opinions on
anything but the NA program itself. In our interactions with society,
we present only the principles of our program, not our members' per-
sonal opinions about other issues.
    Anonymity applies not only to our public pronouncements but
is the principle underlying the whole of our fellowship's public re-
lations policy. In our public contacts, we base the credibility of
our program on NA's effectiveness, not on the personal reputa-
tion of any individual member. We seek to attract addicts and gain
public goodwill solely by virtue of what we have to offer, not by

                              Tradition Twelve                       157


grandiose promotionalism. Exaggerated claims about NA cannot
take the place of the simple, proven validity of our message as
the basis of our public relations policy.
     Twelfth Tradition anonymity or "namelessness" serves a number
of practical functions in our fellowship, each of which has broad spiri-
tual implications. By reminding us that "what's said in this meeting
stays in this meeting," our meeting formats help foster an atmosphere
in which none of us need fear public disclosure of what we share in
the intimacy of our groups. They also remind us that the message,
not the messenger, is what's most important about the sharing that
occurs in our meetings.
     Twelfth Tradition anonymity also means that, in the final analy-
sis, our personal differences make no difference: In NA, in recovery,
we are all equal. It's true that we all come into Narcotics Anony-
mous with our own personal histories, using patterns, educational and
social backgrounds, talents, and shortcomings. But for the purpose
of our own recovery, our occupational identity has no bearing on our
ability to care for one another in NA. A college degree, a trust fund,
illiteracy, poverty--these circumstances that so powerfully affect so
many other areas of our lives will neither help nor hinder our chances
at recovery. Likewise, they will not aid or impede our efforts to carry
the message one addict to another.
     We are equal in NA membership. We are all, at last, anonymous
"parts of" rather than uniquely "apart from" the NA Fellowship. The
anonymity spoken of in our Twelfth Tradition means that, finally, we who
have suffered so long from the isolating disease of addiction "belong."
     Truly, anonymity is the spiritual foundation of all our traditions.
Without it, the unity upon which personal recovery depends would
dissolve in a chaos of conflicting personalities. With it, our groups
are given a body of guiding principle, our Twelve Traditions, helping
them join the personal strengths of their members in a fellowship that
supports and nurtures the recovery of us all.

158                               It Works


    We pray that Narcotics Anonymous never becomes a gray, face-
less collection of addicts without personalities. We enjoy the color,
the compassion, the initiative, the rough-and-tumble liveliness that
arises from the diverse personalities of our members. In fact, our
diversity is our strength. We find that the stronger our individual mem-
bers are, the more strongly united our fellowship becomes. This is a
great paradox of NA recovery: In joining together in a commitment
to the greater good of Narcotics Anonymous, our own welfare is en-
hanced beyond measure. In surrendering self-will, humbly placing
whatever individual power we may have at the service of the whole,
we find an amazing power not only greater than our own but greater
than the sum of all its parts. In serving the needs of others selflessly--
anonymously--we find our own needs served, in turn, far better than
we ever could have imagined. In joining anonymously in a fellow-
ship with other recovering addicts, placing the welfare of the group
ahead of our own, our own spiritual growth is enhanced beyond mea-
sure, not diminished. This is what Tradition Twelve means when it
says that anonymity is the spiritual foundation of all our traditions.
So long as we place spiritual principles first, our individual personali-
ties can grow and flourish like never before, ensuring that our fellow-
ship also continues to flourish, strong and free.
    Our common welfare depends upon our unity. The only hope we
have of maintaining that unity amidst the tremendous diversity we
find in Narcotics Anonymous is by the application of certain com-
mon principles: those found in the Twelve Traditions. So long as we
place the practice of those common principles before the exercise
of our individual personalities, all will be well.

All blue text is linked to indicated location


                                                 Index                              159


                                               Index

                 A                                    conscience 99

                 acceptance 7, 10, 11, 50, 95         conscious contact 77

                 addiction 3, 4, 30, 108              controversy, public 144, 145

                 amends 57, 58, 60, 63-67, 73         courage 9, 27, 28, 36, 55, 60-61

                 anonymity, personal 149-151
                                                      D
                 assets 27, 33, 46, 74
                                                      decision 108, 109
                 atmosphere of recovery 19, 120
                                                      defects 9,41,42,43,44,45,46,70
                 attraction 106-107, 121, 133,
                                                      denial 4, 5, 71-73
                      149-150, 156
                                                      desire 106-110
                 autonomy 91-92, 111-116,
                                                      discipline 42, 71, 82
                      118-119, 154
                                                      disease 3-5, 9, 10, 77
                 B                                    diversity 93, 157-158

                 balance 71, 73-74, 114
                                                      E
                 C                                    encouragement 79, 106-108

                 committee, service boards            endorsement 122, 123, 124,

                      129-130, 141, 155, 156              154-155

                 commitment 17-18,23-25,35,92,        equality 100-101, 157

                      93, 95, 98, 109, 131
                                                      F
                 common needs 112
                                                      faith 14, 22, 30, 45, 50, 51-52,
                 common welfare 91-97, 131,
                                                          104, 126, 134, 152
                      153, 154
                                                      fears 19, 26, 27, 29, 30, 35, 40,
                 communication 93, 99, 102, 141
                                                          54-55, 60-61
                 compassion 48, 109, 110
                                                      fellowship 8, 38-39, 91-93, 94
                 compulsion 4
                                                      fidelity 120-121, 143
                 confidentiality 157
                                                      forgiveness 56, 61


                                                 159

All blue text is linked to indicated location


           160                                   It Works


           freedom 41, 53, 54, 59, 67, 68,              interdependence 91
                  111, 112-113, 117, 128, 135           intimacy 30-32, 66
           fundraising 131-132                          inventory 26-34, 70, 71-72

           G                                            J
           God 22, 38, 41, 51, 52, 58, 59,              joy 25, 82
                  65, 79-81
                                                        L
           God's will 22-23, 25, 77, 81
                                                        leaders 101-102, 154
           gratitude 68, 133, 134
                                                        love 41, 98, 117
           group conscience 99, 153, 154
           groupinventory 114,119,120-121
                                                        M
           group needs 129-131
                                                        meditation 78, 79
           group personality 111, 119-120
                                                        meeting format 112

           H                                            membership 92-93, 106-110,
                                                            130, 132, 153
           harmony 126
                                                        membership requirements
           Higher Power 15, 16, 24, 25, 76,
                                                            106-110, 132, 153
                  77, 99, 100, 101
                                                        message, carrying the 86, 119,
           honesty 5, 6, 12, 36, 40, 55, 61,
                                                            120-121
                  73-74
                                                        message, NA's 118-119
           hope 14, 18
                                                        money, property, or prestige 122
           humility 16, 17, 36, 39, 43, 44,
                                                        morals 27, 28, 34, 72-73
                  48, 49-50, 58, 61-62, 67-68,
                  71-72,103,125-126,137-138,
                                                        N
                  142-143, 148
                                                        NA as such 139

           I                                            newcomers, oldtimers 120
                                                        nonprofessional 136-138
           insanity 13
           integrity 104, 120, 121, 126,
                  135, 138

All blue text is linked to indicated location


                                                 Index                              161


                 O                                    relationships 30-32, 38, 40-41,

                 obsession 4                              63, 66, 74

                 open-mindedness 12,17,80,100,        remorse 43, 54-55, 65

                      103, 104, 114, 115              resentments 30, 55

                 opinions 99-100                      reservations 6, 7

                 opinions,personal 145,147,156        responsibility 22, 43, 54, 57,

                 outside enterprises 154-155              91, 102, 112, 113-118, 121,

                 outsideissues 144,145,146,156            130-131, 132, 134, 146,
                                                          147, 151, 156
                 P
                                                      S
                 patience 50
                 perseverance 9, 24, 28-29, 35,       sanity 13, 16

                      44, 65-66                       self-acceptance 34, 38-39

                 Power greater than ourselves         self-centeredness 5,29-30,36,43,

                      12, 15                              44, 45, 74

                 powerlessness 3, 9, 77, 88           self-obsession 29-30, 36, 43, 55,

                 prayer 22,38,51,52,78,79,80,81           71, 74

                 primary purpose 99-102, 106,         self-respect 67

                      112-114, 116, 117-121, 127,     self-support 128-135, 155

                      128, 130, 144, 154, 156         self-will 19

                 promotion 149, 150, 156-157          serenity 23, 24-25, 76, 82

                 prudence 138, 143, 147               selflessness 68, 74, 87, 96, 100

                 public relations 113-114,            service 65,66,82,87,94,99-100,

                      122-125, 127, 144-145,              104, 109, 152, 154, 155-156

                      147-148, 149, 150, 154-157      service work 129-130
                                                      sharing 37, 38, 79, 92-95, 104
                 R                                    shortcomings 49, 50
                 relapse 70                           simplicity 130, 134, 141-142
                 related facilities 123-124           special interests 114-115

All blue text is linked to indicated location


           162                                   It Works



           special workers 137
           spiritual awakening 51, 82-87
           sponsorship 9,21,28,37,38-40,
                  52, 56, 57, 62
           surrender 6, 7, 8, 20, 21, 23, 42
                  46,50,78,94,95,100,103-104

           T
           Third Step decision 19-25
           tolerance 48, 109
           trust 20, 37, 40, 101-102
           trusted servants 101, 102

           U
           ultimate authority 99,
                  101-102, 104
           unconditional love 37, 82, 88
           uniformity 93
           unity 91-97, 117, 121, 146,
                  154, 156, 157-158
           unmanageability 5, 10

           W
           welcome 106-107
           willingness 7, 12-13, 19, 21,
                  26-27, 42, 48, 58-59

